DRUG SAFETY
ARTICLE
HAUBEN
10.1177/0091270004273936
POTENTIAL
DRUG
SAFETY
AND
UTILITY
REICH OF DATA-MINING ALGORITHMS

Potential Utility of Data-Mining Algorithms
for Early Detection of Potentially Fatal/Disabling
Adverse Drug Reactions: A Retrospective
Evaluation
Manfred Hauben, MD, MPH, and Lester Reich, MD

The objective of this study was to apply 2 data-mining algorithms to a drug safety database to determine if these methods would have flagged potentially fatal/disabling adverse
drug reactions that triggered black box warnings/drug withdrawals in advance of initial identification via “traditional”
methods. Relevant drug-event combinations were identified
from a journal publication. Data-mining algorithms using
commonly cited disproportionality thresholds were then applied to the US Food and Drug Administration database. Seventy drug-event combinations were considered sufficiently
specific for retrospective data mining. In a minority of instances, potential signals of disproportionate reporting were
provided clearly in advance of initial identification via tradi-

A

principle concern of pharmacovigilance is the
timely discovery of adverse drug events (ADEs)
that are novel in terms of their clinical nature, severity,
and/or frequency as early as possible after marketing,
with minimum patient exposure. Spontaneous reporting system (SRS) databases were established as a
pharmacovigilance data source to help identify these
events. Pharmacovigilance is dependent on astute clinical recognition of an unusual or unexpected pattern of
events or a pattern of events that is consistent with a biologically plausible explanation, either within a single
case or across a series of cases. Such clinical/pharmacological knowledge-based approaches have been re-

From Pfizer Inc, New York (Dr Hauben, Dr Reich) and the Department of
Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York (Dr Hauben);
and Departments of Pharmacology and Community and Preventive Medicine, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York (Dr Hauben). Submitted for publication August 6, 2004; revised version accepted December
12, 2004. Address for reprints: Lester Reich, MD, Pfizer Inc, 150 E 42nd
Street (150-3-78), New York, NY 10017.
DOI: 10.1177/0091270004273936

378 • J Clin Pharmacol 2005;45:378-384

tional pharmacovigilance methods. Data-mining algorithms
have the potential to improve pharmacovigilance screening;
however, for the majority of drug-event combinations, there
was no substantial benefit of either over traditional methods.
They should be considered as potential supplements to, and
not substitutes for, traditional pharmacovigilance strategies.
More research and experience will be needed to optimize deployment of data-mining algorithms in pharmacovigilance.
Keywords: Data mining; adverse drug reactions (ADEs)
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 2005;45:378-384
©2005 the American College of Clinical Pharmacology

ferred to as “traditional” methods of signal detection.
Faced with increasingly large and complex SRS databases that may exceed the capacity of safety reviewers
using only traditional methods, there is an interest in
developing more quantitative approaches for signal detection that might usefully supplement traditional
methods. Computerized data-mining algorithms
(DMAs) are one such approach. Data-mining algorithms have been developed to screen large SRS databases for statistical dependencies between drugs and
events in hopes of improving the ability to identify
novel safety hazards of medicines. If there is sufficient
correlation between the observed statistical dependencies and causal relationships, DMAs could significantly improve our ability to detect early “signals” of
ADEs. Because of the semantic ambiguity around terms
such as signals or alerts, we hereafter use the term signal of disproportionate reporting (SDR) to emphasize
that DMAs merely highlight potential reported relationships that may or may not reflect causality but may
provide fruitful hypotheses for further investigation,
depending on the clinical context in which they occur.

POTENTIAL UTILITY OF DATA-MINING ALGORITHMS
There are 2 basic types of DMAs: “simple” disproportionality analysis such as proportional reporting ratios (PRRs)1 and reporting odds ratios (RORs)2 and
methods that use additional statistical adjustments and
Bayesian modeling such as the multi-item gamma Poisson shrinker (MGPS)3 and the Bayesian confidence
propagation neural network (BCPNN).4 Both approaches provide metrics related to the background
probability of drug (across all events) and event (across
all/most drugs) to derive the aforementioned internal
control or model of expected reporting frequency in the
absence of external data on the level of drug exposure.
The Bayesian methods seek to improve the “SDR/noise”
ratio by down-weighting (shrinking) scores based on
small numbers of reports that are associated with
higher statistical variability, but they may be associated
with some decreased capacity for early detection of
SDRs compared to simple disproportionality analysis
(ie, PRRs or RORs) when commonly cited thresholds of
disproportionality are used.5-8
Until 2004, published research in this area had been
conducted mostly by local or worldwide governmental
health agencies, with these researchers providing findings from the DMA currently under investigation or in
use by their respective institution (ie, MGPS [US Food
and Drug Administration],3 PRRs [UK Medicines Control Agency],1 ROR [Netherlands Pharmacovigilance
Foundation Lareb],2,9 BCPNN [World Health Organization Uppsala Monitoring Centre]4,10). Comparison of
the respective DMA to traditional methods of pharmacovigilance, an objective of our research by comparing
the relative timing of the SDRs, was not emphasized in
these research papers. Except for one instance,9 comparative performance between DMAs was not assessed
by these investigators. With one exception,10 the DMA
studied was also not assessed against standard literature sources. Except for a few specific examples in
some of the papers,3,10,11 the data have been anonymized with respect to drug and event, making it difficult, if not impossible, to characterize the nature of the
events from the perspective of their medical importance and level of evidence. For the institution (eg,
pharmaceutical manufacturer) assessing the potential
utility of DMAs for use in its pharmacovigilance program, the absolute or relative absence of substantive information on the nature of adverse events/medical importance in these publications, the lack of assessment
against standard literature sources, and the lack of emphasis on comparative assessments between DMAs
and “traditional methods” of pharmacovigilance represent gaps in the literature. In an attempt to add to the
collective knowledge and partially fill in these gaps
and to help us better understand the potential of
DRUG SAFETY

DMA(s) to usefully supplement our pharmacovigilance program, we undertook this research exercise
using a literature source discussing adverse drug
events that were all medically important with relatively strong evidentiary support.12
Of particular concern to public safety are a subset of
adverse events that have been described as “designated
medical events” (eg, agranulocytosis and toxic epidermal necrolysis). These often raise concerns with as few
as 1 to 3 reports because of their rarity, medical importance, and high drug attributable risk.13 At this time, it
is inadvisable to rely on existing DMAs to detect signals of these events. Black box warnings deal with special safety issues (eg, those leading to death or serious
injury, including in many instances these designated
medical events), and these warnings may be required
by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to be
placed in the product labeling. Because ADEs triggering black box warnings/drug withdrawals in the
United States have important implications for public
safety, it is of interest whether DMAs may provide
SDRs of such events.
For this analysis, we compared a Bayesian algorithm
(MGPS) to a form of simple disproportionality analysis
(PRRs) when applied to the US FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (AERS) database to determine if these
methods would have provided SDRs from a sample of
ADEs obtained from a published compilation of black
box warnings/drug withdrawals1 in advance of their
initial identification via traditional methods that were
in operation at the time. Traditional methods used by
industry or health authorities can include analysis of
clinical trial and epidemiological data as well as the
previously noted spontaneously reported and published postmarketing reports on an ongoing basis or at
predefined time intervals. As described above, the latter methods are dependent on skillful observations by
clinicians who are attuned to the possibility of ADEs
and the need to report them.14
METHODS
A recent peer-reviewed publication summarizing
ADEs that were the subject of black box warnings/drug
withdrawals between 1975 and 2000 in the United
States provided the sample for this analysis.12 Because
an adverse event can be listed some time in the product
label prior to elevation to a black box warning/drug
withdrawal, a manual review of the annual Physicians’
Desk Reference (PDR) was performed to determine the
year in which the given adverse events first appeared.
The PDR is published in cooperation with participating manufacturers. Each entry provides an exact
379

HAUBEN AND REICH
copy of the product’s FDA-approved labeling. The
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 21, Section
201.100(d)(1), requires that all wording in the PDR that
pertains to, among other things, warnings, contraindications, side effects, and hazards be “same in language
and emphasis” as the approved labeling, which means
verbatim use of the language in the approved product
label.15 Deadlines for submission to the annual PDR of
product labeling or changes/modifications to product
labeling, such as the addition of an adverse event, occur in the year prior to the edition year in which they
will appear. Thus, changes submitted by the appropriate deadline in 2003 would appear in the 2004 PDR,
published in November 2003. Labeling-submission
deadlines for manufacturers start from June through
August and depend on a manufacturer’s place in the alphabetical listings of the publication.16 For example,
manufacturers whose names begin with A or B would
have been required to submit their information in June
2003 for publication in the main 2004 PDR. If a manufacturer misses the submission deadline, it has the option of including the information in 1 of 2 PDR supplements that are published the following July and
September.16 Alternately, the manufacturer can distribute updated labeling via the PDR Addendum program,
which allows manufacturers to disseminate product
labeling to the practitioners throughout the year. It is
important to note that the latest changes to product labeling, even if made prior to submission deadlines, are
not always submitted to the PDR at the time of change
and are often submitted for publication in subsequent
supplements or later editions of the PDR.16 We used the
aforementioned submission guidelines as a guide to estimate the latest year by which the respective drugevent combination (DEC) must have been initially recognized and evaluated by the traditional methods operant at the time and submitted for publication. For example, if an ADR appeared in the 1998 annual PDR, it
could have been submitted by the manufacturer in the
second half of 1996 or the first half of 1997. This metric
is imperfect because of the 2-year window and because
it favors the DMAs over traditional methods because
submission of an ADR for publication in the PDR is the
end result of a process of initial signal identification
and evaluation. The time delay associated with this
process is unknown and probably highly variable. For
those DECs that were not listed in the annual PDR
because of an early drug withdrawal, the year of withdrawal was the year that was used in the analysis.
The FDA AERS database is a computerized information database for postapproval safety surveillance. It
functions as an early warning system for ADEs not detected during preapproval testing. It contains ADE re380 • J Clin Pharmacol 2005;45:378-384

ports with approved drugs and therapeutic biological
products submitted in accordance with mandatory reporting obligations by pharmaceutical companies and
voluntarily by health care professionals and consumers. Adverse events are submitted on MedWatch forms.
Adverse event reports are reviewed and coded for data
entry in accordance with the standardized terminology
of the Medical Dictionary for Medical Regulatory Activities (MedDRA). Quarterly extracts are available
through the National Technical Information Service
(NTIS). These quarterly updates are subjected to extensive cleaning (ie, removal of redundant drug nomenclature and duplicate reports) prior to data mining. The
data extract used for the current analysis included data
in the AERS from 1968 through the first quarter of
2003.17
Only those black box warnings/drug withdrawals
describing specific ADE(s) were considered for this
analysis. For each specific ADE or group of ADEs, the
verbatim term(s) from the paper or the PDR were used
for data mining in addition to MedDRA Preferred
Terms that were considered clinically equivalent
or closely related to the verbatim term (eg, hepatic
encephalopathy and liver transplant with hepatic failure), as determined by the first author. The second author reviewed and expanded in some cases the initial
findings following “open-ended” (ie, all drug-event
combinations [DECs] generating an SDR were reviewed for relevance) data mining. Any discrepancies
in results were identified and adjudicated between the
authors.
The 2 DMAs chosen for this analysis were PRRs1 and
MGPS (Lincoln Technologies, Wellesley Hills, Mass).3
The PRR is a simple metric relating the proportional
representation of an event of interest with a drug of interest compared to the proportional representation of
that event among all other drugs in the database (Table I). For this analysis, a PRR>2 with an associated χ2 >
4 (with Yates correction) was considered an SDR, as
this degree of disproportionality has been frequently
used in published studies of data mining.1
The theoretical basis of MGPS has been described in
detail elsewhere3,18 but briefly is as follows. Expected
Table I Proportional Reporting Ratios:
PRR = [A(A + C)]/[B/(B + D)]

Reaction(s) of interest
All other reactions
Total

Drug of
Interest

All Other
Drugs

Total

A
C
A+C

B
D
B+D

A+B
C+D
A+B+C+D

POTENTIAL UTILITY OF DATA-MINING ALGORITHMS

Table II Timing of SDR in Relation to Estimated Year of Submission to PDR/Drug Withdrawal
Algorithm
Relative Timing of SDR vs
PDR Submission/Withdrawal

SDR before
SDR concurrently
SDR after
Could not be categorized

PRRs (n = 65):
Number of DECs (%)

15
32
2
16

(23)
(49)
(3)
(25)

MGPS (n = 59):
Number of DECs (%)

9
20
17
13

(15)
(34)
(29)
(22)

% PRRs/% MGPS

1.5:1
1.4:1
0.1:1
1.1:1

SDR, signal of disproportionate reporting; PDR, Physicians’ Desk Reference; PRR, proportional reporting ratios; DEC, drug-event combinations; MGPS, multiitem gamma Poisson shrinker.

counts for item sets (DECs) are based on the product
of the marginal probabilities of each item (drug and
event) in the database. The observed-to-expected (O/E)
ratio is initially calculated as a crude disproportionality metric. Because the same ratio could be obtained
from cell counts (frequencies) of markedly different
sizes (O/E ratios based on smaller cell counts being
considered more variable or imprecise), further
modeling of the O/E ratios using maximum likelihood
estimation and Bayesian inference is used to adjust the
crude O/E ratios based on the respective cell counts.
Each cell is considered to represent a Poisson process
in which the Poisson parameter distribution is related
to a mixture of 2 gamma distributions. The prior probability distribution of the gamma parameters is obtained
by applying an interactive maximum likelihood algorithm to a negative binomial mixture likelihood. Posterior estimates of the gamma parameters are obtained by
updating the prior with the individual cell counts via
the Bayes theorem providing the posterior distribution
of O/E ratios.
By using logarithmic transformations or taking the
lower 5% cutoff of the posterior distribution (EB05), an
expectation value that adjusts for the variability by
down-weighting or “shrinking” the parameters associated with low cell counts is obtained. These metrics are
known as the empirical Bayes geometric mean (EBGM)
and the EB05. An EB05 of 8 may therefore be interpreted
to mean that reports of the particular DEC occur in the
database 8 times more frequently than would be expected if drug and event were independently distributed in the database. The SDR metric used for a threshold in the current analysis was the lower 5% cutoff of
the empirical Bayes geometric mean > 2 (EB05 > 2).19 It
has been stated that for EB05 ≥ 2, “experience indicates
that the signals using this cutoff have high enough
specificity to deserve further investigation.”3
A variety of data-mining options and parameters exist, including basic covariate adjustment (stratification
by age, gender, and year of report) and cumulative
DRUG SAFETY

subsetting. Stratification tends to reduce spurious associations due to confounding and markedly decreases
the volume of disproportionalities.18,20
For the present analysis, the data mining was performed on suspect drug-ADR pairs using stratification
by age, gender, and FDA year of report, with cumulative subsetting by year (for EB05 calculations).
RESULTS
The peer-reviewed published analysis listed 65 new
black box warnings involving 45 drugs plus 11 additional drugs for which marketing authorization was
withdrawn. A total of 354 DECs involving these 56
drugs were preselected and investigated by 1 author.
The other author identified 19 additional events (12
drugs) following “open-ended” (ie, all DECs generating
an SDR were reviewed for relevance) data mining.
Ten of these drugs were approved by the US FDA in
the 1970s, 25 were approved in the 1980s, and 21 were
approved in the 1990s. Of these 56 drugs, 1 was not in
the AERS database. For the remaining 55 drugs, 70
DECs were considered sufficiently specific for data
mining (an example of a DEC that was excluded was
“oral form not as effective as intravenous” for an antiviral agent). Fifty-nine DECs were associated with an
SDR with MGPS (11 were not) and 65 DECs with an
SDR with PRRs (5 were not). For those DECs associated
with SDRs, performance similarities and differences
were observed in the time to appearance of the SDR between the 2 methods and their relationship to estimated time of submission to the PDR or year of drug
withdrawal. A summary of these findings is provided
in Table II.
There were 16 DECs with PRRs and 13 DECs with
MGPS that exceeded thresholds but could not otherwise be categorized because there were no reports in
AERS at the time of estimated submission to the PDR or
drug withdrawal, or it could not be determined if there
were reports in AERS at the time of estimated submis381

HAUBEN AND REICH

Table III Number of Years of Spontaneous Reporting Experience in AERS to First SDR
SDR First Observed
DMA

PRRs (n = 65)a
MGPS (n = 59)a
% PRRs/% MGPS

First Year of
Reporting, n (%)

46
(71)
21
(36)
2.0:1

Second Year of
Reporting, n (%)

11
(17)
11
(19)
0.9:1

3-5 Years of
Reporting, n (%)

4
(6)
16
(27)
0.2:1

>5 Years of
Reporting, n (%)

4
(6)
11
(19)
0.3:1

AERS, Adverse Event Reporting System; DMA, data-mining algorithms; SDR, signal of disproportionate reporting; PRR, proportional reporting ratios; DEC,
drug-event combinations; MGPS, multi-item gamma Poisson shrinker.
a. All 59 DECs generating an SDR with MGPS also generated an SDR with PRRs—29 in the same year and 30 from 1 to 19 years before MGPS.

sion because of our 2-year window for estimated submission time.
Of the 65 SDRs with PRRs, 46 (71%) occurred in the
first year the DEC was identified in AERS. Of the 59
SDRs with MGPS, 21 (32%) occurred in the first year. A
summary of the relationship of the SDR to the number
of years of reporting experience in AERS is provided in
Table III.
For the 30 DECs in which an SDR was generated by
PRRs in advance of MGPS, 13 generated an SDR with 1
or 2 reports, with 5 before the estimated time of submission to the PDR or drug withdrawal. If a commonly
used case count (n) threshold of n > 2 for these latter 5
DECs had been used,1 4 of 5 still would have generated
an SDR with PRRs before the estimated time of submission to the PDR or drug withdrawal but concurrently
with MGPS. The mean delay in the generation of an
SDR with PRRs for the aforementioned 13 DECS using
n > 2 was 2.9 years. MGPS never generated an SDR with
n < 3. For the 17 of the aforementioned 30 DECs initially generating an SDR with an n > 2 with PRRs, up to
25 reports were needed to generate a SDR with PRRs
(mean = 7.1 reports).
DISCUSSION
Although DMAs such as MGPS and PRRs have the potential to improve pharmacovigilance screening processes, their utility may be highly situation dependent.
For the majority of DECs from a published compilation
of black box warnings/drug withdrawals, there was no
obvious benefit of either over traditional methods in
terms of initial “signal” detection. In a minority of instances (MGPS,9 PRRs15), there was a benefit in that a
potential SDR was provided clearly in advance of the
estimated PDR submission. However, when an SDR
did occur, irrespective of its relationship to the PDR
submission date, PRRs trended toward signaling earlier than MGPS (eg, 71% of initial signals with PRRs occurred in the first year of reporting vs 36% with
382 • J Clin Pharmacol 2005;45:378-384

MGPS). This enhanced “sensitivity” with PRRs may be
associated with an overabundance of “signals,” including “false-positive signals” of no importance to public
safety that may require additional triage criteria for
practical implementation. This may be particularly
problematic when considering disproportionalities associated with case counts of 1 or 2. In practice, this is
often mitigated by applying case count thresholds (eg,
n > 2) or by choosing higher PRR thresholds. For the 30
DECs in which an SDR was generated by PRRs in advance of MGPS, 13 generated an SDR with 1 or 2 reports, with 5 before the estimated time of submission to
the PDR or drug withdrawal. When a threshold of the
number of reports (n > 2) for these latter 5 DECs had
been used, 4 of 5 still would have generated an SDR in
advance of the estimated time of submission to the PDR
or drug withdrawal, but they no longer would have
generated an SDR in advance of MGPS. Thus, it appears that one aspect of the performance gradient between PRRs and MGPS disappeared in this subsetting,
if the case count threshold of n > 2 was used. With PRRs,
a case count threshold of n > 2 would still be expected
to generate more SDRs relative to MGPS, and thus for
this exercise, MGPS may be considered under these
circumstances more efficient if case count thresholds
are used. However, the overabundance of signals associated with simple forms of disproportionality analysis, in the absence of case count thresholds (eg, n > 2),
may not be prohibitive from an operational point of
view because expert safety reviewers may quickly filter
out many “false-positive” associations by integrating
prior knowledge of drugs, events, patient populations,
and diseases in a process that may resemble an informal
application of Bayesian hypothesis refinement. This
remains uncertain given that the frequently used and
reasonable case count thresholds results in a paucity of
published data over the full range of reporting experience in naturalistic pharmacovigilance settings.
Pharmacovigilance is not based on a firm theoretical
foundation and is both art and science. Therefore, there

POTENTIAL UTILITY OF DATA-MINING ALGORITHMS
are scenarios in which the observation of disproportionalities from individual cases might prompt a refined assessment and monitoring strategy (eg, selected,
clinically similar events in separate reports). David
Finney, who originally delineated numerical approaches to SRS data, said “the essence is to collect
facts that individually tell little, but collectively form a
clue to drug dangers.”21
Because commonly cited thresholds are unvalidated, subjective, and adjustable, the clinical significance of these findings is currently unclear. In developing a pharmacovigilance strategy that incorporates
DMAs, the trade-offs in “sensitivity” and “specificity”
associated with the choice of algorithms and thresholds (disproportionality and case counts) should be
carefully considered, including the statistical instability associated with disproportionalities based on 1 or 2
reports. However, it should be noted that for “designated medical events,” coincidental associations are so
unlikely and the consequences of delayed recognition
so high that even 1 report could constitute a strong
warning, prompting further investigation. It is hoped
that published findings related to disproportional reporting over the full range of reporting experience will
help to optimize threshold selection.
There are several significant limitations to this analysis. The sample of DECs examined from the US FDA
database represents a tiny fraction of reported DECs to
the FDA, and this study did not address the significance of SDRs generated for events not included in
black box warnings. This nonsystematic analysis cannot be used to draw inferences about the overall performance characteristics of these techniques. It is likely
that the incremental utility of DMAs is highly situation
dependent. Although not all of the ADEs examined
were designated medical events, they were clustered at
the high end of the spectrum of medical seriousness
and would be expected to be subject to close scrutiny
by traditional methods. The incremental utility of
DMAs could therefore be higher for nonserious or less
serious events not subject to the same level of scrutiny.
Another intriguing possibility is the use of DMAs to
screen for higher order associations such as complex
drug-drug interactions or syndromes that might be less
amenable to detection by clinical cognition. In addition, there are numerous nuances and pitfalls in the
systematic validations and performance characterization of automated signal detection methods, including
the lack of standardized data-mining procedures (eg,
selection and combination of adverse event terms,
numerical thresholds, and dictionary hierarchy thresholds), variations in database and dictionary architectures, and the multiple biases, confounding factors,
DRUG SAFETY

and data quality limitations inherent to voluntary reporting systems. For example, as noted in the Results
section, there was disagreement between the 2 authors
in terms of event selection. The fact that 1 author identified 19 additional events following “open-ended” data
mining points out the inherent subjective nature of
event selection for retrospective analyses. Although
these 19 events were a small proportion (5.4%) of the
total of 354 DECs initially investigated, it demonstrates
the importance of an “open-ended” event analysis to
improve/confirm the reliability of the data upon which
any conclusions are based, and it is a practice that we
would recommend. However, caution and sensible
medical judgment are warranted due to the susceptibility to various interpretive biases. For example, in a process akin to multiple comparisons and orientation bias,
a data miner with a strong incentive to believe in a particular outcome may use nonspecific case definitions
(ie, adverse event terms) of dubious clinical relevance
in hopes of avoiding results that contradict preexisting
expectations. Data mining is a welcome addition to the
pharmacovigilance tool kit that has the potential to improve our ability to monitor the safety of medicines, but
data dredging or torturing should be avoided.
In addition, we subsetted our data-mining analysis
by year, and it is possible that an analysis employing
increased temporal resolution (eg, quarterly instead of
yearly) might have detected differences in those DECs
that appeared to have been identified concurrently by
traditional methods and the DMA.
Reports in the AERS database are not the only source
of labeling information. Labeling updates can occur as
a result of new data from several sources, including
clinical trials, the evolving safety profile of other drugs
in the same class, and epidemiological information
that would not be captured in AERS. It should also be
noted that our retrospective analysis may not reflect
the full range of prospective data-mining practices in
“real-life” data mining because they are exploratory in
nature and would incorporate various subjective processes and judgments related to human cognition that
defy explicit characterization. It is important to appreciate that retrospective validation exercises such as ours
(eg, the data miner knows the ADE “to be signaled”) are
uniquely susceptible to various interpretive biases due
to the use of multiple unvalidated thresholds metrics,
algorithms, and post hoc definitions.8 Performance with
a prospective analysis could be better or worse. Any
performance differentials between PRRs and MGPS
similar to what we observed are likely to be significantly mitigated when these methods are used as one
element of a comprehensive pharmacovigilance program that uses multiple approaches to signal detection.
383

HAUBEN AND REICH
In summary, we found that when the defined minimum time delay between recognition of a potential
ADE and amendment of the corresponding product label in the PDR was considered, the use of 2 DMAs with
preselected thresholds failed to outperform traditional
pharmacovigilance practices for the majority of DECs
that triggered a black box warning or drug withdrawal.
In a minority of instances, the DMAs highlighted an association in advance of traditional methods, and this
suggests the potential of DMAs to be useful supplements to, but not substitutes for, traditional pharmacovigilance techniques. However, the incremental utility of DMAs with be highly contingent on the
opportunity costs associated with “false alarms.” As
expected, trade-offs in “sensitivity” and “specificity”
were observed that are highly dependent on the thresholds chosen. Data mining in pharmacovigilance is a dynamic field, and additional study and experience
should be strongly encouraged. However, we advise
against overattention to the development of DMAs at
the expense of research and discussion on improving
the quality of the data and the methods by which clinical judgment and medical knowledge are applied to the
process of “signal” detection. Additional systematic
data and prospective experience are needed to more
fully understand the performance characteristics of
these methods.
REFERENCES
1. Evans SJW, Waller P, Davis S. Use of proportional reporting ratios
(PRRs) for signal generation from spontaneous adverse drug reaction
reports. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2001;10:483-486.
2. Van Puijenbroek E, Diemont W, van Groothest K. Application of
quantitative signal detection in the Dutch spontaneous reporting system for adverse drug reactions. Drug Saf. 2003;26:293-301.
3. Szarfman A, Machado SG, O’Neill RT. Use of screening algorithms
and computer systems to efficiently signal higher-than expected
combinations of drugs and events in the US FDA’s spontaneous reports database. Drug Saf. 2002;25:381-392.
4. Bate A, Lindquist M, Edwards IR, et al. A Bayesian neural network
method for adverse drug reaction signal generation. Eur J Clin
Pharmacol. 1998;54:315-321.

384 • J Clin Pharmacol 2005;45:378-384

5. Hauben M. Trimethoprim-induced hyperkalemia: lessons in data
mining. Br J Clin Pharm. 2004;58:338-339.
6. Hauben M, Reich L. Safety related drug-labelling changes: findings
from two data mining algorithms. Drug Saf. 2004;27:735-744.
7. Moseley JNS, Heeley S, Elkins-Daukes S, Evans S. Preliminary
comparison of 2 signal detection methodologies in the UK regulatory
authority spontaneous ADR database. Drug Saf. 2004;27:950-951.
8. Hauben M. Application of an empiric Bayesian data mining algorithm to reports of pancreatitis associated with atypical
antipsychotics. Pharmacotherapy. 2004;24:1122-1129.
9. Van Puijenbroek EP, Bate A, Leufkens HGM, Lindquist M, Orre R,
Egberts ACG. A comparison of measures of disproportionality for signal detection in spontaneous reporting systems for adverse drug reactions. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2002;11:3-10.
10. Lindquist M, Stahl M, Bate A, Edwards IR, Meyboom RHB. A retrospective evaluation of a data mining approach to aid finding new
adverse drug reactions signals in the WHO international database.
Drug Saf. 2000;23:533-542.
11. Almenoff JS, DuMouchel W, Kindman LA, Yang X, Fram D.
Disproportionality analysis using empirical Bayes data mining: a tool
for the evaluation of drug interactions in the post-marketing setting.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2003;12:517-521.
12. Lasser K, Allen P, Woolhandler S, Himmelstein D, Wolfe S, Bor D.
Timing of black box warnings and withdrawals for prescription medications. JAMA. 2002;287:2215-2220.
13. Begaud B, Moride Y, Tubert-Bitter P. False positives in spontaneous reporting: should we worry about them. Br J Clin Pharmacol.
1994;38:401-404.
14. Trontell A. Expecting the unexpected: drug safety, pharmacovigilance and the prepared mind. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1385-1387.
15. Code of Federal Regulations, 21 CFR §201.100(d)(1) (2004).
16. Personal communication, Mukesh Mehta, Thomson Healthcare,
Inc, 2004.
17. US Food and Drug Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation
and Research. Adverse Events Reporting System (AERS). Availabile
at: http://www.fda.gov/cder/aers/default.htm.
18. DuMouchel W. Bayesian data mining in large frequency tables,
with an application to the FDA spontaneous reporting system. Am
Stat. 1999;53:177-190.
19. Gould AL. Practical pharmacovigilance analysis strategies.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2003;12:559-574.
20. Hauben M. A brief primer on automated signal detection. Ann
Pharmacother. 2003;37:1117-1123.
21. Finney DJ. The detection of adverse reactions to therapeutic
drugs. Stat Med. 1982;1:153-161.

