Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 885–892

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Journal of Biomedical Informatics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yjbin

Development of a benchmark corpus to support the automatic extraction
of drug-related adverse effects from medical case reports
Harsha Gurulingappa a,b,⇑, Abdul Mateen Rajput c, Angus Roberts d, Juliane Fluck a,
Martin Hofmann-Apitius a,b, Luca Toldo c
a

Fraunhofer Institute for Algorithms and Scientiﬁc Computing (SCAI), Schloss Birlinghoven, 53754 Sankt Augustin, Germany
Bonn-Aachen International Center for Information Technology (B-IT), Dahlmannstrabe 2, 53115 Bonn, Germany
Department of Knowledge Management, Merck KGaA, Frankfurterstrabe 250, 64293 Darmstadt, Germany
d
Department of Computer Science, University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld S1 4DP, United Kingdom
b
c

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 15 March 2011
Accepted 11 April 2012
Available online 25 April 2012
Keywords:
Adverse drug effect
Benchmark corpus
Annotation
Harmonization
Sentence classiﬁcation

a b s t r a c t
A signiﬁcant amount of information about drug-related safety issues such as adverse effects are published in medical case reports that can only be explored by human readers due to their unstructured nature. The work presented here aims at generating a systematically annotated corpus that can support the
development and validation of methods for the automatic extraction of drug-related adverse effects from
medical case reports. The documents are systematically double annotated in various rounds to ensure
consistent annotations. The annotated documents are ﬁnally harmonized to generate representative consensus annotations. In order to demonstrate an example use case scenario, the corpus was employed to
train and validate models for the classiﬁcation of informative against the non-informative sentences. A
Maximum Entropy classiﬁer trained with simple features and evaluated by 10-fold cross-validation
resulted in the F1 score of 0.70 indicating a potential useful application of the corpus.
Ó 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Adverse drug effect is a response of a drug which is noxious and
unintended, and which occurs at doses normally used in humans
for the prophylaxis, diagnosis, therapy of disease, or for the modiﬁcation of physiological function [1]. Most information about the
drug’s efﬁcacy and adverse effects are obtained during clinical
trials and post-marketing surveillance [2]. Organizations like the
World Health Organization (WHO), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the European Medicines Agency (EMEA), and the
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)
maintain a reporting system that enables individuals to spontaneously report the experienced adverse effects related to the use of
medicines or healthcare products. A large portion of information
that includes public as well as proprietary resources are carefully
monitored by the drug manufacturers and the drug regulatory
agencies where the medical complications are brought into public

⇑ Corresponding author at: Fraunhofer Institute for Algorithms and Scientiﬁc
Computing (SCAI), Schloss Birlinghoven, 53754 Sankt Augustin, Germany.
E-mail addresses: harsha.gurulingappa@scai-extern.fraunhofer.de (H. Gurulingappa), abdul-mateen.rajput@external.merckgroup.com (A.M. Rajput), a.roberts@
dcs.shef.ac.uk (A. Roberts), juliane.ﬂuck@scai.fraunhofer.de (J. Fluck), martin.hof
mann-apitius@scai.fraunhofer.de (M. Hofmann-Apitius), luca.toldo@merckgroup.
com (L. Toldo).
1532-0464/$ - see front matter Ó 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2012.04.008

notice through data sources such as RXList,1 Drug Information Portal,2 or PharmaPendium.3 Adverse effects present major ethical and
legal issues for the pharmaceutical and health care industries.
Although discretely visible drug-related information is publicly
available in a semi-structured manner, a substantial amount of information remains uncovered in the textual form. This includes the
electronic patient health records, hospital discharge summaries,
medical case reports, full text research articles, blogs [4], and news
reports [5].
With the growing amount of unstructured textual data, information extraction (IE) technologies [3,6] have gained popularity
over more than a decade. The aim of information extraction is to
automatically extract useful facets of information from the huge
volumes of unstructured textual data. In the context of medical
sciences, such processing may involve identifying the names of
medical entities, the relationships between various entities and
the events associated with them. Information extraction has immense potential in the medical domain [7]. A typical example of
a medical information extraction system is the MedLEE [9] system
that has found various applications in the medical scenarios [8].
Examples of EU-sponsored projects that have aimed at systematic

1
2
3

http://www.rxlist.com/script/main/hp.asp.
http://druginfo.nlm.nih.gov/drugportal/drugportal.jsp.
https://www.pharmapendium.com.

886

H. Gurulingappa et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 885–892

exploration of information in text include EU-ADR,4 EU-PSIP,5 and
IMI-EHR4CR.6 Although there has been a signiﬁcant progress in the
information extraction research, a precise practical task would still
require the availability of manually annotated corpora. A manually
annotated corpus serves multiple purposes. First, it provides the necessary data for developing or optimizing the system irrespective of
the underlying methodology (i.e. statistical, rule-based or machine
learning-based). It serves as a gold standard (often referred to as
ground truth) against which the performance of automatic systems
can be compared. Furthermore, annotated corpora can also be used
as curated dataset for the construction of literature-based knowledgebase (such as MetaCore,7 and BRENDA8).
In the biological domain, efforts have been made to generate
semantically annotated corpora like GENIA [10], BioCreative9 and
BioNLP.10 However, these bio-corpora are restricted to the entities
and events of biological interest such as gene names, protein names,
cellular location or cellular events such as protein–protein interactions. In comparison to the biology domain, the availability of annotated corpora in the medical domain is limited. This is partially due
to the proprietary nature of the existing data as well as ethical issues. In recent years, collaborative efforts such as CLEF [11] have
been investing efforts to generate semantically annotated medical
corpora for information extraction. The medical NLP challenge I2B2
[12] provides de-identiﬁed and annotated patient discharge summaries as well as a platform for common evaluation of information
extraction techniques. There is a limited availability of task-speciﬁc
corpora such as the AZDC corpus [13] annotated with the disease
names or the Chem corpus [14] annotated with the chemical names
that can be applied for speciﬁc named entity recognition tasks. The
DISAE corpus [15] contains 400 MEDLINE articles annotated with
the names of diseases and adverse effects without information about
the drugs. Nevertheless, there is no annotated corpus that is publicly
available (to the best of author’s knowledge) that can be used for
training, optimization or evaluation of the techniques for the identiﬁcation of drug-related adverse effects from free text.
This paper reports on the construction of a gold standard corpus
in which MEDLINE case reports11 have been annotated for the mentions of drugs, adverse effects, dosages as well as the relationships
between them. The entities and the relationships are annotated systematically to ensure that the quality of data is reliable enough to
support information extraction research. Finally, as an example with
an application point of view, the usability of the corpus is demonstrated by developing and validating a sentence classiﬁcation model
that can discriminate between informative sentences against the
non-informative ones. The corpus is named as the ADE (adverse drug
effect) corpus and annotations over the corpus are made freely available online at https://sites.google.com/site/adecorpus/.

2. Methods
2.1. The ADE corpus characteristics
During the development of a benchmark corpus, several characteristics have to be considered. Amongst them, two important
ones are the domain suitability of the corpus and the target user
group. Considering the domain suitability, medical case reports
were of the ﬁrst choice since they provide important and detailed
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

http://www.alert-project.org/.
http://www.psip-project.eu/.
http://www.ehr4cr.eu/.
http://www.genego.com/metacore.php.
http://www.brenda-enzymes.org/.
http://www.biocreative.org/news/corpora/biocreative-iii-corpus/.
http://bionlp-corpora.sourceforge.net/.
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/indexing/training/PUB_050.htm.

information about symptoms, signs, diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up of individual patients. More importantly, case reports can
serve as an early warning signal for the under-reported or unusual
adverse effects of medications [16]. Since the goal of this work is to
generate a corpus for public usability, MEDLINE articles were used
due to their nature of free public availability. Therefore, the ADE
corpus constitutes a subset of MEDLINE case reports.
2.2. Document sampling
Currently, MEDLINE contains more than 1.5 million medical
case reports. In order to restrict the scope of the corpus to drug-related adverse events, a PubMed12 search with drug therapy and adverse effect as MeSH [17] terms was performed limiting the language
to English. The text option was chosen to be abstract in order to eliminate the documents with only title and no abstract text. A precise
PubMed query performed on 2010/10/07 is as follows:
‘‘adverse effects’’[sh] AND (hasabstract[text] AND Case
Reports[ptyp]) AND ‘‘drug therapy’’[sh] AND English[lang]
AND (Case Reports[ptyp] AND (‘‘1’’[PDAT]: ‘‘2010/10/07’’
[PDAT]))
This process retrieved nearly 30,000 documents from PubMed
out of which 3000 documents (referred to as ADE corpus) were randomly selected for the annotation and benchmarking purposes. A
corpus of 3000 annotated documents is believed to be substantially large to support the development and validation of information extraction systems.
An additional set of 100 non-overlapping documents (referred
to as ADE-seed corpus) were selected in order to be used by the
annotators for practicing the annotation task as well as for the
annotation guideline reﬁnement and stabilization. KNIME13 was
used for document sampling and dataset generation for the annotation task. KNIME is an open source workﬂow management system
that provides graphically viewable data manipulation and processing environment. KNIME-based workﬂows are easily reproducible
and minimize data handling errors.
2.3. Annotation guidelines
A critical issue that reﬂects the quality of an annotated corpus is
consistency [19]. In order to generate an annotated corpus for
information extraction modeling or performance benchmarking,
consistent and uniform annotation across all the documents is
essential. To ensure the consistency, a set of draft guidelines was
developed and provided to all annotators. The guidelines provide
rules that annotators should follow when working on documents.
Draft guidelines were periodically revised before beginning the
annotation of ADE corpus (see Section 2.4 for details). Important
components of the annotation guidelines are as follows:
2.3.1. Drug
Names of drugs and chemicals that include brand names, trivial
names, abbreviations and systematic names were annotated. Mentions of drugs or chemicals should strictly be in a therapeutic context. This category does not include the names of metabolites,
reaction byproducts, or hospital chemicals (e.g. surgical equipment
disinfectants).
2.3.2. Adverse effect
Mentions of adverse effects include signs, symptoms, diseases,
disorders, acquired abnormalities, deﬁciencies, organ damage or
death that strictly occur as a consequence of drug intake.
12
13

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/.
http://www.knime.org/.

H. Gurulingappa et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 885–892

887

Fig. 1. Example of a sentence annotated with drug, dosage, adverse effect and the
relationships between them.

2.3.3. Dosage
Dosage information that include the quantitative measurements (e.g. 0.1 mg/kg/day) as well the frequency mentions (e.g.
two tablets twice daily) were annotated.
2.3.4. Relationship
The scope of a relationship was deﬁned and restricted to the
sentence level. There should be a clear mention of a drug/chemical
resulting in an adverse effect deﬁned within the context of a sentence. Mentions of drugs, disorders or dosages that do not ﬁt into
a relation were not annotated. Relationships were annotated between the drugs and adverse effects as well as between the drugs
and dosages. Fig. 1 shows an illustration of a sentence annotated
with the entities and relationship between them.
2.4. Annotation methodology
2.4.1. Annotation participants
Altogether, ﬁve individuals participated in the generation and
revision of the annotation guidelines. Amongst them, three individuals were involved in the annotation task. All the annotators
possess a minimum qualiﬁcation of M.Sc. degree with the background related to Biomedicine. Two annotators have substantial
experience working in the biomedical text mining domain whereas
the third annotator has comparatively little practical experience
working with text mining-related topics.
2.4.2. Annotation workﬂow
The annotation workﬂow follows the standards established by
the CLEF framework [19]. Knowtator [21] version 1.9 beta 2 was
the tool used for annotation. The CLEF framework provides an easily conﬁgurable text annotation environment plugged into the
knowtator toolkit. Fig. 2 shows the workﬂow adapted for the annotation task.
An individually single annotated document (i.e. a document
annotated by only one annotator) can reﬂect several problems.
They include idiosyncratic errors made by the annotators, missing
annotations or the consistent under-performance of the individuals. In order to overcome these problems, a strategy of triple annotation [20] was applied. During the process of triple annotation,
each document is independently annotated by three annotators
and the sets of annotations are compared thereafter for quality
assurance.
The annotation task started with applying the draft guidelines
for annotating the ADE-seed corpus. First, the ADE-seed corpus of
100 documents was divided into ADE-seed-set1 and ADE-seed-set2
with each comprising 50 non-overlapping documents. As indicated
in Fig. 2, initially the ADE-seed-set1 sub-corpus was annotated by
all three annotators by strictly applying the draft guidelines provided. The agreement between the annotators was determined
using the Inter-Annotator Agreement (IAA) scores (see Section
3.1). The IAA scores were determined for the entities as well as
for the relationships (see Section 3.2). The level of agreement
was determined for all the documents and the under-performing
documents were manually reviewed to check for disagreeing
instances. An underperforming document is one that contains at
least one disagreeing annotation. Depending on the necessity,
changes were made to the annotation guidelines that were used.

Fig. 2. The workﬂow employed for the annotation task (adapted from [19]).

The process was repeated for the ADE-seed-set2. Counts of the
annotated entities and relationships over the ADE-seed corpus for
two preliminary rounds of annotation are provided in Tables 1
and 2.
Before starting the annotation of the ADE corpus, an interactive
stabilization of the annotation guidelines was performed based on
the experiences gained during the annotation of ADE-seed corpus.
An interactive stabilization of annotation guidelines involved mutual discussion between the annotators concerning any inconsistencies or conﬂicts in understanding the guidelines followed by
subsequent reﬁnement of the annotation rules. The ADE corpus
of 3000 documents was divided into ADE-set1, ADE-set2, and
ADE-set3 subsets with each comprising 1000 non-overlapping documents. Each annotator processed two corpus subsets. With this
strategy, every document was annotated by two annotators and
the total number of documents that each annotator has to read
was reduced by one-third. Fig. 3 shows the distribution of the subsets of ADE corpus among the different annotators. Table 3 shows
the counts of the annotated entities and relationships over the
ADE corpus.
2.4.3. Annotation harmonization
During the harmonization process, the double annotated documents were subjected to a review by the respective annotators in
order to resolve the conﬂicting annotations and to improve the
overall quality of the annotated corpus. Each document was reviewed by only two annotators who annotated the respective document earlier. The aim of annotation harmonization is to focus on
the differences in annotator’s interpretation of the guidelines and
the differences in their interpretation of the documents. During
harmonization, the documents were not completely read. Only
those instances that were marked by at least one annotator were
investigated for correctness. Documents that do not contain any
annotation from both the annotators or documents where both
the annotators agree completely were not reviewed. Documents
that contain at least one conﬂicting annotation were subjected to
the review process by the respective annotators. The following precautions were taken during the harmonization process.
1. No entirely new annotations were added if they were not
marked earlier by either of the annotators.
2. No annotations were removed if they were marked earlier
by both the annotators.
3. Annotations were added or removed if they were marked
by any one of the annotators and provided they both agree
on the decision thereafter.

888

H. Gurulingappa et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 885–892

Table 1
Counts of the annotated entities and relations in the ADE-seed-set1 corpus. Numbers within the brackets indicate the unique number of sentences that contain at least one
relation. Enumerations related to dosages are zeroes since no dosage information was annotated during this round.
Entity counts

Annotator-1
Annotator-2
Annotator-3

Relation counts

Drug

Adverse effect

Dosage

Drug-adverse effect

Drug-dosage

116
120
57

139
159
132

0
0
0

166 (90)
177 (84)
52 (26)

0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)

Table 2
Counts of the annotated entities and relations in the ADE-seed-set2 corpus. Numbers within the brackets indicate the unique number of sentences that contain at least one
relation.
Entity counts

Annotator-1
Annotator-2
Annotator-3

Relation counts

Drug

Adverse effect

Dosage

Drug-adverse effect

Drug-dosage

91
86
54

83
77
60

4
3
0

110 (68)
95 (65)
59 (46)

4 (4)
3 (3)
0 (0)

Table 3
Counts of the annotated entities and relations in the ADE corpus. Numbers within the
brackets indicate the unique number of sentences that contain at least one relation.
Each annotator handles only 2000 documents that are distributed according to Fig. 3.
Entity counts

Relation counts

Drug Adverse effect Dosage Drug-adverse effect Drug-dosage

Fig. 3. Distribution of the subsets of ADE corpus among the different annotators.
Each subset contains 1000 non-overlapping documents.

4. In case of partially overlapping annotations, only the conﬂicting parts were resolved. For instance, Annotator-1
marks acute lymphoblastic leukemia whereas the Annotator-2 marks lymphoblastic leukemia, then the decision will
be made to resolve the annotation of the word acute.
The harmonization was performed over the complete ADE
corpus in the presence of annotators for both the entities as well
as the relationships. Table 4 shows the counts of the annotated
entities and relationships over the ADE corpus after the harmonization procedure. Twenty-eight documents were removed from the
ADE corpus due to errors induced by the annotation software as
well as manual handling errors (such as missing annotations and
annotation offset shifts). At the end of harmonization, the ADE
corpus contains 2972 documents having 420,515 tokens within
20,967 sentences out of which 4272 sentences have been annotated with names and relationships between drugs, adverse effects
and dosages. The sentences with drug-dosage relationships (i.e.
213 sentences) constitute a subset of 4272 sentences that contain
drug-adverse effect relationships.
2.5. Modeling a sentence classiﬁer
In order to demonstrate an example scenario where the ADE
corpus can be applied, models for sentence classiﬁcation were
developed and validated. Although the scope of this work does
not aim to extensively build a sentence classiﬁcation model, with
an application point of view the usability of the corpus has been
shown. Additionally, the experiments performed with sentence
classiﬁcation do not implicitly restrict the scope of the corpus to
sentence classiﬁcation task.
A sentence classiﬁcation framework helps in the extraction of
sentences that contain statements of hypotheses or declarations
about the adverse effects related to certain drugs. It helps in

Annotator-1 2391 3330
Annotator-2 3097 3464
Annotator-3 3999 4604

129
69
77

3995 (2490)
4028 (2681)
5489 (3404)

140 (111)
71 (60)
83 (77)

Table 4
Counts of the annotated entities and relations in the ADE corpus
after harmonization. Numbers within the brackets indicate the
unique number of sentences that contain at least one relation.
Entity counts
Drug
Adverse effect
Dosage

5063
5776
231

Relation counts
Drug-adverse effect
Drug-dosage

6821 (4272)
279 (213)

retrieving the documents or sentences that contain potential signals indicating the drug-related adverse effects that can help in
safety monitoring of the drugs as well as to develop new hypothesis based on existing evidences.
The ADE corpus (after harmonization containing 2972 documents) was transformed into sentences using the Genia Sentence
Splitter [23]. The sentence splitting was performed after the complete annotation and harmonization of the ADE corpus. As a result
of sentence splitting, the ADE corpus of 2972 documents generated
20,967 sentences. The corpus of sentences was divided into 4272
sentences containing at least one drug-related adverse effect mention that were labeled as Positive. The remaining 16,695 sentences
that contain no information about the adverse drug effects were
separated and labeled as Negative. Therefore, the sentences corpus
contains overall 20,967 instances labeled as either Positive or
Negative that can be subjected to the classiﬁcation task. Fig. 4 illustrates the sentence classiﬁcation framework applied for training
and validating a model for classifying the informative and noninformative sentences.
For the purpose of training and validation, the Naïve Bayes classiﬁer [24] and the Maximum Entropy classiﬁer [25] implemented
within the MALLET toolkit [26] were applied with the default

H. Gurulingappa et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 885–892

Fig. 4. Sentence classiﬁcation framework applied for training and validating a
model for classifying the informative (Positive labeled) and non-informative
sentences (Negative labeled).

parameter settings using all words occurring in sentences as
features.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Inter-annotator agreement metrics
Over the ADE-seed as well as the ADE corpora, the double annotated documents were used for the determination of Inter-Annotator
Agreement (IAA) scores. The IAA scores were calculated using the F1
score as a criterion [22]. The F1 score measures the harmonic mean of
precision and recall between the annotators using one annotator as a
standard and the other as a reference. The reason for applying F1
score compared to conventional measures such as Kappa [34] is that
F1 scores are computed at the level of entities. Since the annotation
task requires ﬁnding the correct boundaries of entities in addition
to label assignment, chance agreement is effectively zero, and therefore F1 score is equivalent to kappa. This offers an advantage of
understanding the named entities on which annotators completely
agree, partially agree, or completely disagree. In addition, the F1 score
provides an easy and effective way for calculating the level of agreement on relationships. The IAA scores were determined for both the
entities as well as for the relationships. GATE [18] framework was
used for the determination of IAA scores.
For the entities, IAA scores were determined using the exact
match and partial match as criteria. Exact match is a situation where
both the annotations should completely overlap whereas partial
match is a situation where the annotations may partially or completely overlap. Using complete and partial match as criteria helps
in understanding the entities over which the annotators disagree
completely and those instances where annotators agree at least partially. For the relationships, two types of evaluations were applied.
They are the exact entity match with exact relation and partial entity
match with exact relation. The exact entity match with exact relation
requires that the annotations of the entities overlap completely
and the relationship is correctly annotated. In case of partial entity
match with exact relation, a relationship that links two partially or
completely matching entity spans is considered to be correct.
3.2. Inter-annotator agreement calculation
The IAA scores between the annotators were determined over
the ADE-seed corpus during two preliminary rounds of annotation.

889

Whereas, the IAA scores over the ADE corpus were determined before the ﬁnal harmonization was performed. The agreement levels
were determined for the entities as well as for the relationships.
Tables 5 and 6 show the IAA scores over the ADE-seed-set1 and
ADE-seed-set2 corpora respectively. The ADE-seed-set1 corpus did
not contain any mentions of dosages that ﬁt into a pre-deﬁned
relationship with drugs. Therefore, the IAA scores for dosages were
enumerated as zero for the entity mentions as well as for the relationships with drugs. During the preliminary annotation rounds,
the level of agreement between Annotator-1 and Annotator-2 remained consistent for drug names. A potential reason is that drug
names often occur as one word entities (e.g. minocycline) and they
hardly suffer from boundary mismatch problems. However, the
agreement levels for the exact name matches of adverse effects
and dosages were unsatisfactory. The names of adverse effects often occur as descriptive multiword terms and deciding the correct
term boundaries was a major problem. For instance, Annotator-1
marked non-metastatic gestational trophoblastic tumor whereas
the Annotator-2 marked the same instance as gestational trophoblastic tumor. Nevertheless, the partial name matches for adverse
effects had substantial level of agreement. Dosage information
faced severe annotation problems. Mentions such as low-dose were
often misinterpreted or overseen by the annotators and were not
annotated. Such instances represent the contemporary errors induced during the annotation process that were improved later
on. Typical examples of relationship annotation errors include
one in the sentence the patient developed monoarthritis 2 weeks
after initiation of IFN-beta, which persisted during 14 months of therapy and resolved with discontinuation of the medication [PMID:
16393774]. A relationship between monoarthritis and IFN-beta exists which was correctly annotated by one annotator whereas overseen by the other annotator. Such instances were exempliﬁed in
the annotation guidelines and thoroughly discussed before the
annotation of main corpus was performed. Annotator-3 having
minimum experience with text annotation exercises often
achieved lower agreement scores with rest of the annotators. However, after the annotation of ADE-seed-set2, the agreements between Annotator-3 and rest of the annotators improved and
reached until 60% for adverse effects and their relationships to
drugs. Since the ﬁnal goal was to harmonize the complete annotations, the ADE corpus was annotated by three annotators with no
further revisions of the annotation guidelines.
Table 7 shows the IAA scores between the annotators over the
large ADE corpus that contains 3000 documents. The ADE corpus
was strategically divided and annotated by three annotators.
Therefore, the IAA scores were determined over the sets of 1000
documents that were commonly annotated by two annotators.
Based on the experiences gained during the preliminary annotation rounds, all the three annotators were able to consistently
annotate the drug names. Although the names of adverse effects
underwent frequent boundary problems, the results of partial
name matches were consistent amongst all three annotators. The
dosage information being the poorest annotated entity class was
strictly resolved during the harmonization process. Therefore, the
authors believe that dosage annotations in spite of having poor
agreement between annotators are still valuable due to the thorough harmonization later on. All the annotated entities and relationships were subjected to the harmonization procedure after
the complete annotation of ADE corpus in the presence of respective annotators in order to achieve a consistent ﬁnal annotation.
Randomly selected 200 annotated sentences from the ADE corpus
after harmonization were reviewed by two drug safety experts in
order to judge the quality of annotations where both experts
agreed on all annotations. This illustrates the suitability of annotated corpus for modeling real world information extraction challenges related to drug safety.

890

H. Gurulingappa et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 885–892

Table 5
IAA scores between the annotators over the ADE-seed-set1 corpus containing 50 documents. Enumerations related to dosages are zeroes since no dosage information was
annotated during this round.
Annotators

1 and 2
1 and 3
2 and 3

Entity (exact match)

Entity (partial match)

Drug

Adverse effect

Dosage

Drug

Adverse effect

Dosage

0.76
0.28
0.29

0.66
0.43
0.40

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.82
0.38
0.38

0.86
0.55
0.51

0.00
0.00
0.00

Annotators

Relation (exact entity match with exact relation)

1 and 2
1 and 3
2 and 3

Relation (partial entity match with exact relation)

Drug-adverse effect

Drug-dosage

Drug-adverse effect

Drug-dosage

0.64
0.14
0.10

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.79
0.37
0.37

0.00
0.00
0.00

Table 6
IAA scores between the annotators over the ADE-seed-set2 corpus containing 50 documents.
Annotators

1 and 2
1 and 3
2 and 3

Entity (exact match)

Entity (partial match)

Drug

Adverse effect

Dosage

Drug

Adverse effect

Dosage

0.73
0.63
0.57

0.88
0.65
0.66

0.29
0.00
0.00

0.90
0.77
0.76

0.88
0.66
0.67

0.86
0.00
0.00

Annotators

Relation (exact entity match with exact relation)

1 and 2
1 and 3
2 and 3

Relation (partial entity match with exact relation)

Drug-adverse effect

Drug-dosage

Drug-adverse effect

Drug-dosage

0.69
0.51
0.46

0.28
0.00
0.00

0.87
0.65
0.66

0.85
0.00
0.00

Table 7
IAA scores between the annotators over the ADE corpus containing 3000 documents. Each annotator handles only 2000 documents that are distributed according to Fig. 3. IAA
scores are calculated over the sets of 1000 documents that are commonly annotated by two annotators.
Annotators

1 and 2
1 and 3
2 and 3

Entity (exact match)

Entity (partial match)

Drug

Adverse effect

Dosage

Drug

Adverse effect

Dosage

0.80
0.75
0.76

0.72
0.68
0.63

0.26
0.05
0.03

0.82
0.77
0.78

0.80
0.77
0.77

0.43
0.37
0.09

Annotators

1 and 2
1 and 3
2 and 3

Relation (exact entity match with exact relation)

Relation (partial entity match with exact relation)

Drug-adverse effect

Drug-dosage

Drug-adverse effect

Drug-dosage

0.68
0.63
0.60

0.17
0.14
0.12

0.78
0.74
0.75

0.26
0.18
0.15

3.3. Semantic corpus analysis
After the harmonization procedure, in order to analyze the
semantic distribution of entities in the ADE corpus, the annotated
names of drugs and adverse effects were mapped to standard
ontologies using the ProMiner [28] system. The drug names were
mapped to the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classiﬁcation system [29] using the DrugBank [31] dictionary. The ATC
hierarchically classiﬁes several drugs according to their pharmacotherapeutic properties. Since ATC is hierarchical, its level two
classes were used for the analysis. The names of adverse effects
were mapped to the MedDRA [30] classiﬁcation system. MedDRA
contains a hierarchically organized medical terminology and it
been widely applied for pharmacovigilance and drug regulatory
affairs. Similar to ATC, the level two MedDRA classes were used
for analysis. Out of 5063 annotated drug names, 4205 could be

normalized to the ATC (i.e. 83%) whereas for the adverse effects,
4356 out of 5776 names (i.e. 75%) could be mapped to the MedDRA. Table 8 shows top ﬁve ATC classes to which frequently occurring drugs belong. Table 9 shows top ﬁve MedDRA classes to which
frequently occurring adverse effects belong.

Table 8
Top ﬁve ATC classes to which the frequently occurring drugs
belong.
ATC class

% of drugs

Antineoplastic agents
Ophthalmologicals
Antibacterial agents
Immunosuppressants
Antiepileptics

22
11
11
9
8

H. Gurulingappa et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 885–892
Table 9
Top ﬁve MedDRA classes to which the frequently occurring adverse
effects (AE) belong.
MedDRA class

% of AE

Cardiac arrhythmias
General system disorders
Epidermal and dermal conditions
Allergic conditions
Hepatic and hepatobiliary disorders

12
11
9
9
8

Table 10
Performances of sentence classiﬁers validated by 10-fold cross-validation of the
training data. Precision, Recall, and F1 score for the class positive are reported.

Naïve Bayes
MaxEnt

Precision

Recall

F1 score

0.91
0.75

0.08
0.64

0.14
0.70

3.4. Performance measure of sentence classiﬁers
The performance of the sentence classiﬁcation framework was
evaluated using 10-fold cross-validation [27]. During the crossvalidation experiments, the discriminative capability of the
classiﬁer to correctly distinguish between the informative and
non-informative sentences was measured using Precision, Recall,
and F1 score over the class Positive as a criterion.
3.5. Results of sentence classiﬁcation
The Naïve Bayes and the Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) classiﬁers
were applied for training and validating models for sentence classiﬁcation that can discriminate the potentially informative against
the non-informative sentences (see Section 2.5 for experimental
details). The sentences that contain at least one drug-related adverse effect formed the informative (Positive labeled) dataset
whereas the remaining sentences formed the non-informative
(Negative labeled) dataset. Upon evaluation by 10-fold cross-validation, the performances of Naïve Bayes and MaxEnt classiﬁers
are shown in Table 10.
A MaxEnt model trained with simple features such as words in
the sentence resulted in a good classiﬁcation performance. Removal of stop-words degraded the performance of classiﬁcation.
There has been a signiﬁcant amount of work dedicated to the sentence classiﬁcation task in the medical text [32]. A variety of feature sets and techniques such as feature boosting have been
proposed for improving the performance of classiﬁcation. However, since the scope of this work does not extensively aim at
building a sentence classiﬁer, the performance of classiﬁcation
has been shown as an example scenario where the corpus could already ﬁnd a direct application. A detailed framework on application of the corpus for adverse effect sentence classiﬁcation using
shallow linguistic features as well as its ability to support the identiﬁcation of novel drug-adverse effect associations has been demonstrated by Gurulingappa et al. [33].
4. Conclusion
A semantically annotated corpus designed to support the extraction of information about drug-related adverse effects from medical
case reports has been presented. The corpus is intended to facilitate
the development and validation of automated systems for evidence-based pharmacovigilance and hence overcome the manual
reading task that has been performed in many pharmaceutical
and healthcare companies. The corpus has been systematically

891

double annotated using a well-deﬁned annotation schema in order
to ensure the maximum consistency. The annotations were performed in different rounds with intermediate quality control checks
using the inter-annotator agreement scores. The process of harmonization of double annotated documents in order to generate a representative consensus annotation is discussed as well. Finally, an
example application scenario has been demonstrated by applying
the corpus for training and validating sentence classiﬁers that can
discriminate the informative sentences against the non-informative ones.
The corpus has been made publicly accessible in order to
encourage the research in the direction of evidence-based pharmacovigilance and drug safety aspects. Currently, a signiﬁcant amount
of work has been going on in order to develop a system for automatic extraction of drug-related adverse effects. As an immediate
following step, a second version of the corpus thoroughly checked
by the clinical experts will be released. Our future work intends to
evaluate the performance of couple of commercial and freely available tools for named entity recognition and relationship extraction.
We also plan to extend our work to include blogs and news reports
for the analysis of drug-related adverse events.
Acknowledgments
This work has been funded in part by a ‘‘B-IT Research School’’
scholarship Grant from the state of NorthRhineWestfalia to
Harsha Gurulingappa. We also thank drug safety experts at Merck,
Dr. Maren Rohrbacher (MD PhD) and Dr. Yorki Tayrouz (MD PhD)
for reviewing a subset of annotations.
References
[1] World Health Organization (WHO) glossary of terms used in
Pharmacovigilance. <http://www.who-umc.org/graphics/15338.pdf>.
[2] Ahmad SR. Adverse drug event monitoring at the Food and Drug
Administration. J Gen Intern Med 2003;18(1):57–60.
[3] Erhardt RA, Schneider R, Blaschke C. Status of text-mining techniques applied
to biomedical text. Drug Discov Today 2006;11(7–8):315–25.
[4] Leaman R, Wojtulewicz L, Sullivan R, Skariah A, Yang J, Gonzalez G. Towards
internet-age pharmacovigilance: extracting adverse drug reactions from user
posts to health-related social networks. In: Proceedings of the 2010 workshop
on biomedical natural language processing; 2010. p. 117–25.
[5] Collier N, Doan S, Kawazoe A, Goodwin RM, Conway M, Tateno Y, et al.
BioCaster: detecting public health rumors with a Web-based text mining
system. Bioinformatics 2008;24(24):2940–1.
[6] Jagannathan V, Mullett CJ, Arbogast JG, Halbritter KA, Yellapragada D,
Regulapati S, et al. Assessment of commercial NLP engines for medication
information extraction from dictated clinical notes. Int J Med Inform
2009;78(4):284–91.
[7] Rodriguez-Esteban R. Biomedical text mining and its applications. PLoS
Comput Biol 2009;5(12):e1000597.
[8] Hyun S, Johnson SB, Bakken S. Exploring the ability of natural language
processing to extract data from nursing narratives. Comput Inform Nurs
2009;27(4):215–23.
[9] Chen L, Friedman C. Extracting phenotypic information from the literature via
natural language processing. Stud Health Technol Inform 2004;107:758–62.
[10] Kim JD, Ohta T, Tateisi Y, Tsujii J. GENIA corpus – semantically annotated
corpus for bio-textmining. Bioinformatics 2003;19(Suppl. 1):i180–2.
[11] Roberts A, Gaizauskas R, Hepple M, Davis N, Demetriou G, Guo Y, et al. The
CLEF corpus: semantic annotation of clinical text. AMIA Annu Symp Proc
2007:625–9.
[12] Uzuner O, Solti I, Xia F, Cadag E. Community annotation experiment for ground
truth generation for the i2b2 medication challenge. J Am Med Inform Assoc
2010;17(5):519–23.
[13] Leaman R, Miller C, Gonzalez G. Enabling recognition of diseases in biomedical
text with machine learning: corpus and benchmark. In: Proceedings of the 3rd
international symposium on languages in biology and medicine; 2009. p. 82–
9.
[14] Kolarik C, Klinger R, Friedrich CM, Hofmann-Apitius M, Fluck J. Chemical
names: terminological resources and corpora annotation. In: The Proceedings
of BioTxtM workshop (6th edition of the language resources and evaluation
conference; 2008.
[15] Gurulingappa H, Klinger R, Hofmann-Apitius M, Fluck J. An empirical
evaluation of resources for the identiﬁcation of diseases and adverse effects
in biomedical literature. In: 2nd workshop on building and evaluating

892

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

H. Gurulingappa et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012) 885–892
resources for biomedical text mining (7th edition of the language resources
and evaluation conference), Valetta, Malta; May 2010.
Kidd M, Hubbard C. Introducing journal of medical case reports. J Med Case
Rep 2007;1:1.
Lowe HJ, Barnett GO. Understanding and using the medical subject headings
(MeSH) vocabulary to perform literature searches. JAMA 1994;271(14):
1103–8.
Cunningham H, Maynard D, Bontcheva K, Tablan V. GATE: a framework and
graphical development environment for robust NLP tools and applications. In:
Proceedings of the 40th anniversary meeting of the association for
computational linguistics (ACL’02), Philadelphia; July 2002.
Roberts A, Gaizauskas R, Hepple M, Demetriou G, Guo Y, Roberts I, et al.
Building a semantically annotated corpus of clinical texts. J Biomed Inform
2009;42(5):950–66.
Wilbur WJ, Rzhetsky A, Shatkay H. New directions in biomedical text
annotation: deﬁnitions, guidelines and corpus construction. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006;7:356.
Ogren PV. Knowtator: a plug-in for creating training and evaluation data sets
for Biomedical Natural Language systems. In: Proc 9th internat protege conf;
2006.
Goutte C, Gaussier E. A probabilistic interpretation of precision, recall and Fscore, with implication for evaluation. Adv Inform Retrieval Lect Notes Comput
Sci 2005;3408:345–59.
Rune S, Yoshida K, Yakushiji A, Miyao Y, Matsubayashi Y, Ohta T. AKANE
system: protein–protein interaction pairs in BioCreAtIvE2 challenge, PPI-IPS
subtask. In: Proceedings of the second biocreative challenge evaluation,
workshop; April 2007. p. 209–12.

[24] Rish I. An empirical study of the naive Bayes classiﬁer. In: Proceedings of IJCAI01 workshop on empirical methods in artiﬁcial intelligence; 2001.
[25] Nigam K. Using maximum entropy for text classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of IJCAI99 workshop on machine learning for information ﬁltering; 1999. p. 61–7.
[26] McCallum AK. Mallet: a machine learning for language toolkit; 2002. <http://
mallet.cs.umass.edu>.
[27] Kohavi R. A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation
and model selection. In: IJCAI’95 Proceedings of the 14th international joint
conference on artiﬁcial intelligence; 1995.
[28] Hanisch D, Fundel K, Mevissen HT, Zimmer R, Fluck J. ProMiner: rule-based
protein and gene entity recognition. BMC Bioinformatics 2005;6(Suppl. 1):S14.
[29] Miller GC, Britt H. A new drug classiﬁcation for computer systems: the ATC
extension code. Int J Biomed Comput 1995;40(2):121–4.
[30] Brown EG, Wood L, Wood S. The medical dictionary for regulatory activities
(MedDRA). Drug Saf 1999;20(2):109–17.
[31] Wishart DS, Knox C, Guo AC, Shrivastava S, Hassanali M, Stothard P, et al.
DrugBank: a comprehensive resource for in silico drug discovery and
exploration. Nucl Acids Res 2006;34(Database issue):D668–72.
[32] McKnight L, Srinivasan P. Categorization of sentence types in medical
abstracts. AMIA Annu Symp Proc 2003:440–4.
[33] Gurulingappa H, Fluck J, Hofmann-Apitius M, Toldo L. Identiﬁcation of adverse
drug event assertive sentences in medical case reports. In: First international
workshop on knowledge discovery and health care management (KD-HCM),
European conference on machine learning and principles and practice of
knowledge discovery in databases (ECML PKDD); 2011.
[34] Blackman NJM, Koval JJ. Interval estimation for Cohen’s kappa as a measure of
agreement. Stat Med 2000;19(5):723–41.

