Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Biomedical Informatics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yjbin

Original Research

Augmenting aer2vec: Enriching distributed representations of adverse
event report data with orthographic and lexical information
Xiruo Ding a, *, Justin Mower b, Devika Subramanian b, Trevor Cohen a, *
a
b

Department of Biomedical Informatics & Medical Education, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Department of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Pharmacovigilance
Post-marketing surveillance
Natural language processing
Word embeddings
Retrofitting
Subword embeddings

Adverse Drug Events (ADEs) are prevalent, costly, and sometimes preventable. Post-marketing drug surveillance
aims to monitor ADEs that occur after a drug is released to market. Reports of such ADEs are aggregated by
reporting systems, such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS). In
this paper, we consider the topic of how best to represent data derived from reports in FAERS for the purpose of
detecting post-marketing surveillance signals, in order to inform regulatory decision making. In our previous
work, we developed aer2vec, a method for deriving distributed representations (concept embeddings) of drugs
and side effects from ADE reports, establishing the utility of distributional information for pharmacovigilance
signal detection. In this paper, we advance this line of research further by evaluating the utility of encoding
orthographic and lexical information. We do so by adapting two Natural Language Processing methods, subword
embedding and vector retrofitting, which were developed to encode such information into word embeddings.
Models were compared for their ability to distinguish between positive and negative examples in a set of
manually curated drug/ADE relationships, with both aer2vec enhancements offering advantages in perfor­
mances over baseline models, and best performance obtained when retrofitting and subword embeddings were
applied in concert. In addition, this work demonstrates that models leveraging distributed representations do not
require extensive manual preprocessing to perform well on this pharmacovigilance signal detection task, and
may even benefit from information that would otherwise be lost during the normalization and standardization
process.

1. Introduction
Adverse drug events (ADEs) were defined by the International Con­
ference on Harmonisation (ICH) as “a response to a drug which is
noxious and unintended and which occurs at doses normally used in
man for prophylaxis, diagnosis, or therapy of disease or for the modifi­
cation of physiologic function”[1]. ADEs are quite common and some­
times preventable. For example, an ADE rate of 10% (10 potential ADEs
per 100 admissions) was reported in two pediatric care clinics[2]. A
similar rate of 6.5 per 100 admissions was reported in two tertiary care
hospitals in Boston, Mass, during a 6-month period and 28% of these
ADEs were judged to have been preventable[3]. ADEs are also very
costly: the report, Preventing Medication Errors, by the Institute of Med­
icine, estimated a cost of $1,983 per preventable ADE, with a total na­
tional annual cost of $887 million[4].
Many adverse effects of drugs, especially rare ones, may not be

revealed before their release to market. This is in part due to the limi­
tations of clinical trials, such as not having a sufficiently large cohort to
account for the variety of human responses in a larger population[5].
One way to address this issue is to use a postmarketing surveillance
system to monitor ADEs, by collecting and aggregating reports from
consumers, physicians, and manufacturers. Many countries have
developed their own reporting system infrastructures. Prominent ex­
amples include the United States (U.S.) Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS), the European Medicine
Agency (EMA) pharmacovigilance system, the Yellow Card Scheme in
the United Kingdom, and the Canada Vigilance Program. In the U.S.,
pharmaceutical manufacturers are obliged to submit reports to FAERS
when serious or unexpected ADEs occur, or on a periodic basis, under
Code of Federal Regulations 21 CFR 314.80 (a). In addition, voluntary
reports may be submitted by healthcare practitioners or consumers.
On account of the large number of submitted reports (increasing

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: xiruod@uw.edu (X. Ding), jmm21@rice.edu (J. Mower), devika@rice.edu (D. Subramanian), cohenta@uw.edu (T. Cohen).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2021.103833
Received 10 February 2021; Received in revised form 10 May 2021; Accepted 2 June 2021
Available online 8 June 2021
1532-0464/© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

X. Ding et al.

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

from around 200,000 in the year 2000 to over 2 million in 2019 [6]), the
question arises of how to prioritize drug/ADE relationships identified
within these data for regulatory attention. The U.S. FDA has already
implemented several data mining methods to detect potential ADE sig­
nals, including disproportionality methods (the Proportional Reporting
Ratio[7], Reporting Odds Ratio[8], and Multi-Item Gamma Poisson
Shrinker[9]), change-point analysis (CPA)[10], text mining [11], and
incorporation of external data (such as various chemical and biological
data sources and geographical information system technology) into data
mining approaches[12]. Disproportionality methods in particular have
been widely used for signal detection by the FDA and EMA [13,14],
amongst others. These methods utilize discrete report-level statistics,
such as counts of co-occurrence events between a drug and ADE of in­
terest. As a consequence, they are fundamentally limited in their ability
to draw connections between similar ADEs (such as those with related
pathophysiology) and drugs (such as those with related mechanisms).
This inability to leverage similarity is analogous to the inability of
Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques based on discrete counts
of words to recognize useful relationships such as synonymy.
In the context of post-marketing drug surveillance, one implication
of this lack of generalization capabilities concerns the inability to
address different forms of the same drug. This becomes especially
serious when raw FAERS data are used for signal detection. For example,
in the dataset used in the current work, the reporting frequency of clo­
zaril is 18,862, while other similar forms, ”clozapine” (N = 15,908),
”clozapine_tablets” (N = 8), ”clozaril_(clozapine)_unknown” (N = 4), are
comparably less reported. However, we know that clozaril and clozapine
have the same active ingredients, so their signals should arguably be
aggregated. In this case, it is very unlikely for disproportionality
methods to report a strong signal for ”clozapine_tablets”, which was only
reported 8 times. For ”clozaril” and ”clozapine”, which were highly
frequently reported, disproportionality metrics will fail to aggregate the
signal from across these two terms without pre-processing using explicit
mapping procedures. Unlike drugs, ADEs are mapped to MedDRA
”Preferred Terms” as part of the reporting procedure. While this should
mitigate for the problem of the same side effect being reported in
different terms, it remains the case that standard disproportionality
metrics are unable to aggregate signal from side effects with similar
pathophysiological mechanisms, such as thrombotic stroke and
myocardial infarction.
In NLP, the limited ability of models treating words as discrete fea­
tures to generalize has motivated the rapid adoption of continuous
representations of words, known as word vectors or word embeddings
[15–17], as an alternative representational paradigm. Word embeddings
are trained on large corpora in an unsupervised or semi-supervised
manner, such that words occurring in similar contexts will have
similar vector representations. This permits downstream machine
learning models to generalize. Neural word embeddings have gained
prominence as a method of generating such representations since the
introduction of computationally efficient training methods that permit
them to scale to large corpora. In particular, the skipgram-withnegative-sampling (SGNS) algorithm introduced by Mikolov et al. [17]
has been widely employed as a component of the popular word2vec1
and gensim2 software packages. With SGNS, a neural network learns to
predict the terms surrounding an observed term, P(tc |to ), where to is a
term observed within the text, and tc is a context term observed within a
window radius of a fixed number of terms (for example, five). The
network is trained using an efficient training procedure that maximizes
this probability for terms observed within a given proximity scope, and
minimizes it for randomly drawn counterexamples (known as negative
samples). On account of the training procedure, words that occur in
similar contexts will have similar input weight vectors, and will result in

1
2

similar context term predictions. Once training has concluded, the input
weights of the neural network for each term are extracted, and serve as
word embeddings for downstream tasks.
In our previous work, we have shown that embeddings trained on
ADE reports can learn to generalize in a similarly useful manner,
providing a means to integrate distributional similarity into pharmaco­
vigilance signal detection. Specifically, the aer2vec algorithm adapts
the SGNS training procedure to predict P(drug|ADE), or vice versa, with
context in this case defined at the report level without considering local
proximity relationships. Recapitulating the probabilistic training
objective of this model as a method of signal detection resulted in im­
provements in performance over disproportionality metrics in current
use on pharmacovigilance signal detection tasks [18]. However, the
capacity for generalization provided by aer2vec representations is
limited to that which can be derived from the distribution of drugs and
ADE in the set of reports used to train them. Additional lexical knowledge
of potential utility for pharmacovigilance is embedded within structured
knowledge resources such as RxNorm[19]. The retrofitting algo­
rithm[20] was developed to encode lexical knowledge from WordNet
[21] into pretrained word embeddings using a secondary training pro­
cedure in which the embeddings for terms that are lexically related are
drawn together in vector space. We adapted this algorithm to the task of
integrating lexical knowledge from RxNorm into aer2vec drug repre­
sentations, which led to further improvements in performance in most
evaluations[22].
The rapid increase in data size is another issue that constrains the
processing time required for methods that can be applied to the entire
set of FAERS reports. Similar constraints apply when considering the
prospect of real-time signal detection. The number of FAERS reports
grew from around 200,000 in the year 2000, to over 2 million in 2019,
making manual annotation and examination of the full set infeasible [6].
In an effort to render these reports amenable to automated analysis,
Banda et al. derived a normalized, standardized dataset from FAERS
using terminological mapping procedures, and shared their code for the
full pre-processing pipeline involved [23]. However, the design of this
pipeline requires detailed knowledge of the terminologies involved, and
reimplementation is required to accommodate changes in FAERS data
models (with two significant changes having occurred to date).
Furthermore, the dataset resulting from this work was published in 2016
and has not been updated since. For these reasons, methods to minimize
the effort required for pre-processing are needed.
In the current paper we extend our previous work in two ways, in an
effort to address the issues described above. First, we compare the utility
of aer2vec embeddings (with and without integrating lexical knowl­
edge) and disproportionality metrics when trained on ADE reports that
have undergone extensive terminologically-driven normalization pro­
cedures to that of those trained on raw reports. Our hypothesis in doing
so was that the capacity for generalization provided by aer2vec with
retrofitting would obviate the need for such normalization proced­
ures. This investigation was motivated in part by a call for methods with
“scalability to accommodate growing databases” using rapid or minimal
preprocessing of data to enable real-time surveillance[12]. To this end,
we also evaluate the utility of encoding orthographic similarity into our
aer2vec models, using an approach originally developed to encode
morphological information into neural word embeddings [24]. Our
hypothesis was that enriching drug embeddings in this way would
provide them with the capacity to generalize on the basis of surface
similarity between terms (such as rofecoxib and celecoxib) and offer
further improvements in performance. Through both retrofitting
and subword embedding methods, we are trying to avoid meaningful
signal remaining undetected because it is scattered across counts for
discrete entities that are related to one another but treated as though they
were independent. As such, the work described in this paper provides an
extensive evaluation of the utility of distributional similarity, ortho­
graphic information and lexical knowledge for pharmacovigilance
signal detection, with and without extensive pre-processing.

https://github.com/tmikolov/word2vec
https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/
2

X. Ding et al.

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

2. Material and methods

to assess performance in the context of minimally preprocessed FAERS
data. However, we did perform a subsequent analysis to establish the
extent to which deduplication influences performance. This additional
analysis used a raw set including only those records that exist in the
standardized set (only in this case, without any standardization or
normalization, as described in further detail in Section 3.6). The large
difference in the numbers of unique DRUGNAMEs between the stan­
dardized and raw sets indicates the amount of variability there is in the
unrefined contents of the DRUGNAME field. This variability is due to re­
porter entry of different trade names, routes, doses, and preparations of
a single generic drug, and is a key issue we aim to address with the
current work.

2.1. FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS)
The FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) monitors re­
ported adverse events to inform decisions such as product labeling
changes, and re-evaluations of approval[25]. FAERS is a spontaneous
reporting system, where health professionals, consumers, and manu­
facturers submit adverse events or medication errors either voluntarily
(for healthcare professionals and consumers) or mandatorily (for man­
ufacturers)[26]. The project originated in 1969 using a computerized
repository, and underwent a major change in 1997, when the system
shifted from using Coding Symbols for Thesaurus of Adverse Reaction
Terms to Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA)[27] as
an underlying terminology. After this, MedDRA became the standard­
ized coding terminology for adverse events and medication errors in
FAERS. In contrast, drug names are not standardized, with the DRUG­
NAME field indicating either valid trade names or drug names from user
inputs. Up to 2013, around 77% of DRUGNAME fields were filled with
valid trade names, the rest being user inputs. In addition, the system
introduced a new data field, PROD_ID, in the third quarter of 2014 to
capture the active ingredient(s) of a drug.
The publicly available FAERS data reports are published quarterly,
dating from 2004 to 2020 Q2 at the time of this study. On account of the
date of dissemination of the evaluation set used for this study, we only
use data up to the end of 2012, which includes 4,514,527 records. There
are four categories for a drug’s presumed role in an adverse event: Pri­
mary Suspect (PS), Secondary Suspect (SS), Concomitant (C), and
Interacting (I), and almost all reports have at least one primary suspect
medication. These categories indicate reporter designations of suspicion
(PS in particular), and taking them into account has been shown to have
a significant impact on model performance in our previous work[22].
Consequently in the current research, we consider two variants of our
data set: (1) The FULL set (includes all report-level drug/ADE events);
and (2) the PS set (includes only PS drugs for all reports), in order to
further observe the effects of reporter designations of suspicion. For
ADEs, we use the PT field which stands for Preferred Term, mapped to
MedDRA. For drugs, we use the DRUGNAME field directly in the model,
with the following minimal preprocessing steps: (1) all entries were
changed into lower case; (2) spaces were replaced with underscores; (3)
trailing special characters were removed. For simplicity, we refer to this
minimally preprocessed dataset as the “raw” set. In addition, we
consider the standardized FAERS dataset released by Banda et al. in
2016, which was constructed with the additional preprocessing step of
mapping drugs to RxNorm standard ingredients and clinical drug forms
(henceforth referred as the “standardized” set)[23]. We use this dataset,
with the same time cutoff of 2012 Q4, to facilitate comparison with
models trained on minimally preprocessed data. To this end, two
matching sets (FULL and PS) were created based on the standardized
dataset also.
Counts for the number of reports, the number of unique DRUGNAMEs,
and the number of unique ADEs are shown in Table 1. Of note, there is a
discrepancy in the number of reports between the standardized set and
the raw set. Banda et al. describe a de-duplication step in their pro­
cessing pipeline, whereby reports sharing the same case id, event date,
drugs, adverse events, demographics and reporter country were
consolidated into a single record[23]. In our initial experiments, we did
not re-implement this de-duplication pipeline, in keeping with a desire

2.2. Encoding distributional information with aer2vec
The aer2vec algorithm[18] adapts the SGNS algorithm[17,28] for
application to ADE reports, where concepts are divided into drugs and
ADEs. By analogy with the idea of an observed term (to ) and context
term (tc ) in natural language, two aer2vec architectures were devel­
oped: aer2vec+ and aer2vec-, modeling P(drug|ADE) and P(ADE|drug)
respectively. Using negative sampling, optimization functions for the
two architectures are as follows[18]:
aer2vec+ : argmax v
[
(
)
∑
logσ vdrug ⋅vADE +
(ADE,drug)∈W

aer2vec− : argmax v
[
(
)
∑
logσ vADE ⋅vdrug +
(drug,ADE)∈W

FULL
PS

# Reports
Raw

3,185,921
3,154,081

4,514,527
4,514,501

# Unique DRUGNAMEs
STD
Raw

# Unique ADEs
STD
Raw

3,912
2,108

16,352
16,330

364,945
62,631

(
logσ

)]
− vdrug′ ⋅vADE

(ADE,drug′ )∈W ′

∑

(
logσ

)]
− vADE′ ⋅vdrug

(drug,ADE′ )∈W ′

where vdrug and vADE represent the weight vectors of drugs and ADEs for
observed entities, and vdrug′ and vADE′ represent these weight vectors for
negative samples. With aer2vec+, which predicts P(drug|ADE), ADEs are
represented by input weight vectors, and drugs are represented by the
network’s output weight vectors. With aer2vec-, the reverse is true. W
and W′ represent the vocabulary of observed and randomly sampled
ADE-drug pairs respectively. The goal of training is to maximize pre­
dicted probabilities for elements of W, and minimize predicted proba­
bilities for elements of W′ , with probabilities estimated as σ(vADE ⋅vdrug ).
Following the parameters of the best-performing models from the
original work[18], the dimension of vectors was set to 100, and models
were trained across five epochs in each experiment. Furthermore, only
aer2vec+ was used for the current experiments, on account of its su­
perior performance in pharmacovigilance signal detection tasks. Drug
and ADE embeddings were trained on each of the four data sets (with
and without normalization, and with and without the PS constraint)
using the aer2vec implementation in the open source Semantic
Vectors package 3[29,30]. To evaluate the robustness of performance
in the context of randomization effects in both training sequence and
stochastic initialization of model weights, we repeated the experiments
ten times with regeneration of the drug and ADE embeddings.
2.3. Encoding lexical information with retrofitting
The retrofitting algorithm is a graph-based method developed to
enrich pretrained word embeddings with lexical information from a
taxonomy[20]. The underlying idea is to bring the vectors representing
words closer to the vectors representing their lexical neighbors in a
taxonomy, while ensuring they do not move too far from their original
position in semantic vectors space. This is achieved by minimizing the
following cost function[20]:

Table 1
Summary counts for different sets. STD = standardized.
STD

∑

16,707
16,707

3

3

https://github.com/semanticvectors/semanticvectors

X. Ding et al.

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

[
]
n
⃒⃒
⃒⃒2 ∑ ⃒⃒
⃒⃒2
( ) ∑
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
Ψ A =
α qi − ̂q i +
β qi − qj
i=1

original retrofitting implementation, in which vectors are reduced to
unit length, obscured information encoded in the magnitude of the
output weight vectors that was of value for predictive modeling[22].
Consequently in the current work we employ the rescaled retrofitting
variant of the algorithm developed in this work. With rescaled retrofit­
ting, the original magnitude of the vector to be retrofitted (‖ ̂
q i ‖) is
stored, and the vector resulting from the retrofitting procedure is
̂
restored to this magnitude subsequently (i.e. qi = qi ‖‖qqii‖‖).

(i,j)∈E

where E is the set of semantic relations of interest, qi the retrofitted
representation for concept i, ̂
q i the original vector representation for this
concept, qj the vector representing a neighbor of qi in E, and model
parameters α a weight assigned to the original vector representations,
and β a weight assigned to the lexical information. The twin goals of
maintaining a representation of the original meaning of a word and
drawing the vector for a word closer to the vector representing its lexical
neighbors are embodied in the first and second terms of the equation,
respectively. This cost function is minimized by repeating the following
update step until convergence is attained (usually after approximately
10 iterations):
∑
α̂q i + βqj
j:(i,j)∈E
∑
qi =
α+β

2.4. Encoding orthographic information with subword embeddings
The two methods described in the previous sections, aer2vec and
retrofitting, were developed to incorporate distributional patterns and
lexical information into word representations, respectively. However,
orthographic similarity, the similarity between the surface forms of words,
can also be of value in recognizing connections between related words
and the entities they represent. For example, in general English, “run”,
“runs” and “running” are different orthographic forms stemming from
the same root, “run”. In recent work, Bojanowski et. al. developed an
approach through which to provide the skipgram-with-negativesampling algorithm with the capacity to represent letter sequences
within words (such as “run” in “running”), termed subwords [24].
The underlying idea of this method involves decomposing a word
into its component n-grams. For example, if we consider only n-grams of
length between three and six characters, the word “running” would be
decomposed as follows:

j:(i,j)∈E

The taxonomy we employed for the current work is RxNorm, which
represents clinical drugs and their relationships, and is a component of
the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS)[19]. RxNorm, as a stan­
dard drug terminology, is curated by the National Library of Medicine
based on 13 different source vocabularies (as of September 2020),
including FDA Structured Product Labels, FDB MedKnowledge, Drug­
Bank and the U.S. Edition of SNOMED CT. Seven RxNorm relation types
are supported in the January 6th, 2020 release version: RO, SY, RB, RN,
SIB, CHD, and PAR[19]. Table 2 provides definitions and counts for each
relation for this version of RxNorm. We utilized the RN, RO and SY re­
lations for the current work. Retrofitting to these relation types has been
shown to improve correspondence between pairwise similarities of
literature-derived embeddings and human judgment of semantic simi­
larity and relatedness in prior work[31].
To facilitate the retrofitting process, the pair-wise relationship file
RXREL.RRF was transformed such that related concepts are grouped
together on a single line, for input into a publicly available imple­
mentation4 of the retrofitting algorithm that accompanied the original
paper. As in our previous work[22], we experimented with different
values of the retrofitting model hyperparameters. Since α and β serve as
weights and are subsequently normalized, we can maintain α +β = 1
which reduces the preceding equation to its numerator. As we have
shown in previous work[22], setting α = β = 0.5 (as was done by Far­
uqui et al. in their seminal work [20]) may not be the optimal balance
point between distributional information (learned by aer2vec) and
lexical information (from RxNorm) for pharmacovigilance signal
detection. In order to further examine weighting effects in this setting,
we evaluate performance at β increments of 0.1, starting from 0 (no
retrofitting: distributional information only) to 1 (representations
dominated by information from neighboring terms).
This prior work also revealed that the normalization procedure in the

- 3-grams:
- 4-grams:
- 5-grams:
- 6-grams:

The subword embedding method maps each of these n-grams to an
input weight vector. The vector for a word (such as “running”) is then
generated on-the-fly, as the average of these input weight vectors.
P(tc |to ) is then estimated as the scalar product between this vector
average (representing the observed term, to ) and the output weight
vector for the context term (tc ), with updates propagating back to the
component n-gram input weight vectors. As is apparent from the
decomposition of the word “running”, each individual word maps to
numerous subwords. A naive implementation of this procedure runs the
risk of exceeding the boundary of the RAM available to store embed­
dings for each of them. To negotiate this constraint, Bojanowski et al.
take a pragmatic approach in which the mapping from subword to
subword embedding is accomplished using a hash function that maps to
a fixed number of embeddings (on the order of 106 )[24]. While this
means that collisions may at times occur, with unrelated subwords
sharing the same embedding, the resulting embeddings have been
shown to improve performance in word similarity and analogical
retrieval tasks [24], and subword embeddings are now a core compo­
nent of the widely-used fastText package5 for embedding generation
and text classification.
In the context of the current work, orthographic information is
especially important in relation to molecular components and drug
names, where systematic naming conventions are used for organic
chemicals (IUPAC[32]) and generic or nonproprietary names (INNs
[33]). The FDA also has policies on usage of drug names regulating
usage of brand names, established names, proprietary names, and so
forth beyond INNs and IUPAC [34]. Two orthographic forms that are
readily recognizable across drug names are prefixes and suffixes. For
example, the prefix “sulfa-” indicates drugs that inhibit dihyrdopteroate
synthase (sulfacetamide, sulfadiazine, sulfamethoxazole, sulfasalazine),

Table 2
RxNorm relation (REL), descriptions, and counts for January 6th, 2020 release.
REL

Description

Count

RO
SY
RB
RN
SIB
CHD
PAR

REL other than synonymy, narrower, or broader
source asserted synonymy
broader REL
narrower REL
sibling REL in a Metathesaurus source vocabulary
child REL in a Metathesaurus source vocabulary
parent REL in a Metathesaurus source vocabulary

5,231,682
566,715
373,253
373,253
16,186
6,619
6,619

4

run, unn, nni, nin, ing
runn, unni, nnin, ning
runni, unnin, nning
runnin, unning

5

https://github.com/mfaruqui/retrofitting
4

https://fasttext.cc/

X. Ding et al.

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

from this procedure 7. For consistency, the same training configurations
and hyperparameter settings were used as with subword embeddings
and retrofitting alone, and the evaluation process for the combined
model was repeated on the four training sets separately.

including antibiotics or anti-inflammatory agents. The suffix“-profen”
(fenoprofen, flurbiprofen, ibuprofen, ketoprofen) is often applied to
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
In order to represent orthographic information of this sort, we
adapted the subword embedding approach to facilitate its application to
the aer2vec architecture. As described previously, the underlying idea
of subword embedding in the context of SGNS is to construct n-grams on
character level for each word, and use those n-grams to construct a
representation for this word using summation[24] as follows:
∑
̂t o = wt to + wg
zg

2.6. Training and Evaluation
For every model variation and on every dataset, the training process
was repeated in 10 independent experiments with different stochastic
starting points, and training occurred over five epochs. The number of
negative samples was set to 5 for all scenarios. Results for the reference
set were generated from the ten instantiations of each configuration,
with reporting of the synthesis of these results for each model variant.
The reference set from the Observational Medical Outcomes Part­
nership (referred to as the OMOP set) is used as the evaluation set for all
models. The OMOP set contains 165 positive controls and 234 negative
controls for 4 ADEs: acute liver injury, acute kidney injury, acute
myocardial infarction (MI), and upper gastrointestinal bleeding, each of
which has approximately 40 positive controls (i.e. drug/ADE relation­
ships considered to be causal in nature) and 60 negative controls (where
drugs are considered not to cause the ADE in question) [38]. The set was
constructed by using NLP methods to extract product labeling infor­
mation from the FDA’s DailyMed website to identify candidate positive
controls, and performing systematic literature review to refine the initial
list. To identify negative controls, similar information sources were used
to find cases where no available evidence showed a causal relationship
between the drugs and ADEs concerned[38].
The baseline metrics used in evaluation are the Proportional
Reporting Ratio (PRR) and the Reporting Odds Ratio (ROR), two dis­
proportionality metrics that are widely used in pharmacovigilance to
detect signals from spontaneous reporting data[7]. Both can be derived
from the following 2 × 2 disproportionality table:
Given Table 3 where a, b, c, d are co-occurrence counts, PRR and ROR
can be calculated as:
a / c
PRR =
a+b c+d
a/ c
ROR =
b d

g∈G t

where G t is the set of N n-grams of the observed term, represented by the
embedding to , and zg is the vector for n-gram g. wt and wg are weighting
terms that determine the relative influence of the term and subword
embeddings respectively, and vary across the subword embedding
literature[24,35]. For the current experiments, we set wt = 1 and wg =
1
N, following Mikolov et al.[35].
We developed our subword embedding implementation by adapting
thee aer2vec[18] and subword embedding[36] capabilities of the open
source Semantic Vectors package[30,29]6. An important distinction
between the original implementation of subword embedding in the
context of SGNS and our implementation within aer2vec + is that in
our case subword embeddings are derived for drugs, which are repre­
sented by the output (rather than input) weights of the neural network.
As such, the vector ̂
v drug (and ̂
v drug′ in the case of negative samples) is
constructed on-the-fly during training as the following linear sum:
̂
v drug = vdrug +

1∑
zg
N g∈G t

P(drug|ADE) can then be estimated as σ (̂
v drug . vADE ), with the resulting
output weight updates concerning both the subword (zg ) and drug (vdrug )
embeddings. As with the original implementation of aer2vec, this
estimation procedure is identical to that used to estimate the strength of
the relationship between a drug and ADE for evaluation purposes.
Two additional details concern the addition of symbols to encode the
start (<’) and end (>’) of a word, and the size of the n-gram components
selected for modeling. For example, 7-gram forms of “ibuprofen” include
“ < ibupro”, “ibuprof”, “buprofe”, “uprofen”, and “profen>”.
There are two points to clarify here: (1) each word is preprocessed by
adding angle brackets (“<>”) around it, so the 9-character word
“ibuprofen” becomes 11-character word “ < ibuprofen>”, permit­
ting selective representation of prefixes and suffixes; (2) the 7-gram form
used in this illustrates number needed to represent the suffix
“profen>’’. We elected to represent all n-grams of 4 to 8 characters in
length on the basis of observations of some common prefixes, suffixes,
and stems for drugs, such as “-vir”, “-arot-”, “-terol”, and “-cycline”[37].
Finally, while we note that another benefit of subword embedding is the
abilty to generate representations for out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words,
we do not utilize this feature in the current paper to facilitate fair
comparison with other methods where OOV words in the evaluation set
cannot be represented.

ROR and PRR are very similar in form, and they were also shown to have
almost identical results on the same data in our previous work[22]. For
the sake of simplicity, only ROR will be shown in this paper unless
otherwise specified. For evaluation, the probability P(drug|ADE) was
̅̅→ ̅̅→
estimated as σ (ADE⋅drug) using our embedding models. PRR and ROR
were estimated from the same data sets. These procedures were
completed for each of the drug/ADE pairs in the OMOP evaluation set,
and the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC)
was used for comparison between different methods.

Table 3
Basis for Calculation of Disproportionality Metrics.

2.5. Combining lexical knowledge and orthographic information

Drug of Interest
Other Drugs

As lexical knowledge and orthographic representations provide
distinct information about words, we hypothesized that they may be
complementary. While preceding sections provide ways to encode lex­
ical relations and orthographic similarity separately, the methods used
for this purpose can be combined by applying subword embeddings
within aer2vec first, and then retrofitting the embeddings that result
6

ADE of Interest

Other ADEs

a
c

b
d

7
While the retrofitting process changes the drug embeddings (̂
v drug ) pro­
duced by the subword embedding procedure, these updates will not propagate
back to the subword level.

https://github.com/semanticvectors/semanticvectors
5

X. Ding et al.

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

3. Results

Table 5
Unaugmented aer2vec on raw FAERS.

3.1. aer2vec without augmentation
The results from experiments with the aer2vec + architecture
without augmentation are shown in Table 4. In these experiments,
aer2vec was trained on two sets of standardized FAERS data: the FULL
set (all drugs) and the PS set (primary suspects only). Both PRR and ROR
were also calculated as baseline models to detect drug signals. Given
that aer2vec training was repeated over 10 independent experiments
(each with different stochastic initializations of the neural network
weights), mean AUC and standard error of the mean (or related confi­
dence intervals for graphs) are reported.
The results in Table 4 confirm that the aer2vec algorithm has
significantly better performance than baseline PRR and ROR models, on
both FULL and PS sets (consistent with prior work [18]), and that
training on the PS set results in a larger increase in AUC for aer2vec
than is observed with the FULL set (0.088 vs 0.078). It is also worth
noting that PRR and ROR have very similar results in both sets.
Results from experiments in which the aer2vec architecture was
trained on minimally preprocessed FAERS data (still including both the
FULL set and the PS subset, with PRR and ROR baselines) are shown in
Table 5. These results show the same patterns as those in Table 4 where
the standardized data were used. The aer2vec models always perform
better than the baseline PRR and ROR disproportionality metrics.
Furthermore, when moving from the standardized to the minimally
preprocessed FAERS data, both PRR and ROR drop in performance. In
contrast, results from the aer2vec algorithm on the PS set significantly
improved, with an increase in AUC of 0.018 (Welch’s t-test: p-val­
ue=.01). While an increase is observable for the FULL set, this is not
statistically significant (increase of 0.01, Welch’s t-test: p-value=.22).

FULL

0.632

0.633

0.710 ± 0.007

PS

0.733

0.733

0.821 ± 0.005

FULL

0.623

0.624

0.720 ± 0.004

PS

0.706

0.707

0.839 ± 0.003

3.4. Combination results
After evaluating their effects independently, we evaluated the com­
bined utility of lexical and orthographic information. Subword embed­
dings were applied during the training of aer2vec drug/ADE
embeddings, and the resulting subword-aware embeddings were then
retrofitted to different degrees (with the influence of lexical information
controlled by β parameters ranging from 0 to 1, as in our prior experi­
ments). For comparison, performance with retrofitting on unaugmented
aer2vec embeddings (blue lines and areas: means and 95% confidence
intervals) is also shown in Fig. 2.
As shown in Fig. 2, the results of combined methods invariably
perform better than baseline ROR statistics. The most obvious benefit
from subword embeddings is from the models trained on the standard­
ized FULL set (Fig. 1a), but some benefit is evident in all models. When
combined with subword embeddings, the retrofitting effects remain the
same as in Section 3.2 when examined independently: the effects on the
raw FAERS dataset are larger than those on the standardized set. Overall
performance with retrofitting and subword embeddings is better than
that of any individual model. Table 8 summarizes models of best per­
formance for each of the four datasets, and provides their corresponding
AUCs. All four best performing models include both aer2vec and sub­
word embeddings, with retrofitting playing an important role with the
raw FAERS datasets.
3.5. Performance on individual side effects
To further investigate the embeddings we generated using different
methods and training sets, we performed an analysis of their utility for
each of the four side effects in the OMOP set.
We limited our examination to the PS set only. In this set, we
examined unaugmented aer2vec embeddings derived from both
standardized and raw sets, aer2vec with subword embeddings on the
raw set, and aer2vec with subword embeddings and retrofitting with
β = 0.8 on the raw set (best performance overall). Fig. 3 shows the re­
sults for all four ADEs. The results suggest that variant models perform
differently for different side effects. For example, the unaugmented
aer2vec model performs significantly worse when trained on stan­
dardized data for acute hepatic failure, conflicting with a general trend
of better performance than with raw data on the other three side effects
and overall. Similarly, the performance improvement with subword
embeddings may be largely attributable to improvements with acute
myocardial infarction in particular, with a smaller improvement with
gastrointestinal haemorrhage. In general, however, the variant with
overall best performance also yields highest AUCs for individual ADEs,
with the sole exception of gastrointestinal haemorrhage, where the
mean AUCs are not significantly different between unaugmented
aer2vec (standardized PS) and overall best performance variant

Table 4
Unaugmented aer2vec on standardized FAERS.
aer2vec (mean ± se)

aer2vec(mean ± se)

Subword embedding was first used with the unaugmented aer2vec
algorithm in order to isolate its effects on the resulting drug/ADE em­
beddings. The results of these experiments are shown in Table 7. With
the standardized FULL and raw PS set, there are statistically significant
improvements in AUCs (at a significance level of α = 0.05). While in­
creases in AUCs are observable for the other two training sets, these are
not statistically significant.

To evaluate retrofitting effects on the unaugmented aer2vec algo­
rithm, a range of retrofitting parameters (β’s) from 0 to 1 was used, with
increments of 0.1. For each β value, 10 repeated experiments were
performed to assess robustness of results in the context of stochastic
elements of the algorithm (such as random initialization of vectors). This
process was repeated for all four training sets: the standardized and raw
FAERS datasets, and their FULL and PS subsets, with results grouped by
subset.
As shown in Fig. 1, retrofitting has a different effect depending on the
nature of the underlying data set. With the minimally preprocessed data,
retrofitting aer2vec improves performance. This improvement is
accentuated as the influence of retrofitting (indicated by β) is increased,
up to the point where β is large enough (> 0.8) that the retrofitting
process obscures the distributional information encoded by aer2vec.
Also, the β needed to achieve the best AUC is different in each set, at β =
0.6 for the minimally preprocessed FULL set, and β = 0.8 for the mini­
mally processed PS set (as shown in Table 6). However, there is no
pattern of improvement with the standardized sets, where RxNorm was
applied during preprocessing and before the application of aer2vec.
On the contrary, with the standardized sets best performance is attained
without retrofitting (β=0) for the FULL set, or with no or little retrofit­
ting (β <= 0.3) for the PS subset (Table 6).

PRR

PRR

3.3. Subword embedding results

3.2. Retrofitting results

ROR

ROR

6

X. Ding et al.

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

Fig. 1. retrofitting results on the FULL set and PS set of standardized and minimally preprocessed FAERS dataset respectively.

results presented in Table 9.
As anticipated when moving from the standardized set to the raw set,
the set of drug names retrieved expands to include trade names and
other variants. For example, aer2vec detects signal from drug names
such as Avandia (rosiglitazone) and amn107 (nilotinib), neither of
which appear as top 10 results with the standardized set, but represent
drugs with known cardiovascular risk profiles[39,40].
When considering the best performing model (bottom right cell of
the table), we observe strong signal from drugs such as “heparin_­
sodium_injection” and “reteplase_(reteplase”, whose generic forms also
appear in the results from the standardized set. In addition, the effects of
incorporating orthographic information are apparent, with “amn107”
and “amn107_amn + cap” proximally ranked when subword embed­
dings were applied.
From a historical perspective, it is worth noting one drug in partic­
ular. Vioxx (rofecoxib) has long been recognized for increased risk of
cardiovascular events, as revealed by Merck’s Vioxx Gastrointestinal
Outcomes Research study in 2000 (for a historical account see [41]). The
different forms of Vioxx (rofecoxib) in the standardized and raw sets also
have different reporting rates, as shown in Table 10, which shows the
number of reports referring to this drug by different names in each set (a
more detailed list with the 100 top-ranked drug forms in the raw and
standardized sets is provided in Supplementary Table 1). The trade
name, Vioxx, was predominantly used in raw FAERS reports, but these
mentions were all converted into the generic form in the standardized
set. The differences in signal associating Vioxx with acute myocardial
infarction across datasets and models can be further examined by
considering the results in Table 11, which shows the strength of this
prediction in each set. When the raw set is used, the predominant
reporting form of “Vioxx” is strongly associated with acute MI. Signal is
present for the generic term “rofexocib” also, but not for the variant form
“rofecoxib_50_mg”. Subword embedding does not strengthen the signal
for this form, perhaps on account of noise introduced by character ngrams related to drug dosage (e.g. 50_mg), and the relatively small
number of training examples using the generic name of the drug. This
result notwithstanding, it is apparent that when subword embedding is
applied, the representations of “rofecoxib” and “rofecoxib_50_mg” are
drawn closer together in the resulting embedding space (Table 12). This
suggests that subword embedding is having the desired effect of drawing
the coxib family together, even though it does not appear to do so in a
manner that permits generalization of this particular drug/ADE associ­
ation. In contrast, when retrofitting is used to introduce lexical infor­
mation, signal from the rarely-used form of “rofecoxib_50_mg” is
strengthened by its taxonomic relationship to both “rofecoxib” and
“vioxx”. However, this comes at the cost of reducing the strength of the

Table 6
Detailed results of retrofitting.
FULL
Raw

PS

β

Standardized

Standardized

Raw

0.0

0.710 ± 0.007

0.720 ± 0.004

0.821 ± 0.005

0.839 ± 0.003

0.1

0.709 ± 0.007

0.727 ± 0.004

0.821 ± 0.005

0.847 ± 0.003

0.2

0.708 ± 0.006

0.734 ± 0.004

0.821 ± 0.005

0.854 ± 0.003

0.3

0.706 ± 0.006

0.740 ± 0.004

0.821 ± 0.005

0.859 ± 0.003

0.5

0.701 ± 0.006

0.749 ± 0.004

0.819 ± 0.006

0.867 ± 0.003

0.6

0.698 ± 0.006

0.750 ± 0.004

0.819 ± 0.006

0.870 ± 0.003

0.8

0.690 ± 0.006

0.743 ± 0.003

0.816 ± 0.006

0.872 ± 0.003

1.0

0.660 ± 0.006

0.676 ± 0.003

0.800 ± 0.006

0.813 ± 0.002

ROR

0.632

0.623

0.733

0.706

Table 7
Subword effects on standardized and raw FAERS datasets (sub = subword em­
beddings. F = FULL set. P = PS set).
Standardized
aer2vec sub

aer2vec

p☆

aer2vec

Raw
aer2vec
sub

p☆

F

0.710±0.007

0.738±0.003

< .01

0.720±
0.004

0.729 ±
0.003

0.087

P

0.821±0.005

0.829±0.004

0.252

0.839±
0.003

0.847 ±
0.001

0.019

☆

p-value from Welch’s t-test.

(Welch’s t-test, p-value=.08).
In addition, we performed a qualitative evaluation of the nearest
neighboring concepts in the resulting embedding spaces. When
comparing drug and ADE embeddings, we recapitulate the training
objective of the model, the sigmoid function of the scalar product be­
tween the embeddings concerned:
⃒
(
)
(
)
̂ drug⃒⃒ADE = σ vdrug ⋅vADE
P
=

1
1 + e−

vdrug ⋅vADE

where vdrug and vADE are embeddings for drug and ADE, respectively. The
mean sigmoid function of the scalar product over 10 independent ex­
periments with the same settings is shown, and used for ranking. We
investigated the highest ranked drugs for a single ADE, acute myocardial
infarction. The same four embedding spaces are compared, with detailed
7

X. Ding et al.

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

Fig. 2. Performance of aer2vec with subword embeddings and retrofitting.

which has reasonably high reporting frequencies in both raw and stan­
dardized sets (n = 11,832 and n = 18,522, respectively, as shown in
Supplementary Table 1). Two drugs with the same “-ine” suffix,
“chlorpromazine” and “theophylline”, were drawn closer to “clozapine”
when subword embeddings were applied in the standardized set. This
increase in proximity is also observed with “clozaril” and “olanzapine”
in the raw set. However, the effect of retrofitting (with β(0.8)) on
proximity between drug vectors is far more pronounced. After retrofit­
ting, “clozapine_tablets” and “fazaclo” are closest in proximity to the cue
drug “clozapine”, despite their relatively low reporting frequencies (8
and 24, respectively).
A more detailed list of the nearest neighbors to “clozapine” is pro­
vided in the Supplementary Table 2 accompanying this manuscript.

Table 8
Best performances on four training sets.
Standardized

Raw

FULL

0.738 ± 0.003 (aer2vec + subword)

0.754 ± 0.002 (aer2vec +
subword + retrofit β = 0.5)

PS

0.829 ± 0.004 (aer2vec + subword
+ retrofit β <=0.2)

0.877 ± 0.001 (aer2vec +
subword + retrofit β = 0.8)

signal from these relatives. The high cosine similarities between vectors
representing taxonomically related terms that may occur when retro­
fitting is used are shown in Table 12. This increase in relatedness ex­
plains the increase in signal from “rofecoxib_50_mg” when retrofitting is
employed, by allowing the underlying model to adjust for underrepresented signals, or reporting rates in practice. This observation
also suggests a potential mechanism for the decrease in signal from
“vioxx” which may be diluted by information from other neighboring
terms that are unrelated to myocardial infarction. More broadly, the
model-specific similarities between different forms of Vioxx (rofecoxib)
shown n Table 12 illustrate how introducing orthographic information
(row 3) enhances the similarity between vector representations of
“rofecoxib” and “rofecoxib_50_mg”, and how retrofitting draws the
vector representations of these taxonomically-related terms together
(rows 4 and 5).
Differences between embedding representations can often be dis­
cerned by comparing the nearest neighboring embedding to a cue term
of interest in different vector spaces. Table 13 provides additional details
about the ten closest drug embeddings to the embedding for “clozapine”,

3.6. De-duplication on raw full set
Upon investigation of the report counts across data sets (shown in
Table 1), we found that the discrepancy in the number of reports be­
tween the standardized set and the raw set mostly originated from the
de-duplication step in the process of standardization. To further inves­
tigate the effect of this preprocessing step on performance, and also to
assure fairness of comparison between models on raw and standardized
sets, we constrained our raw FULL set to reports with report IDs repre­
sented in the standardized set. We will referred to this set as the filtered
raw FULL set. In a subsequent experiment, we trained all models
(aer2vec, subword embeddings, and retrofitting frameworks) on this
filtered data set, as well as estimating disproportionality metrics as a
point of comparison.
8

X. Ding et al.

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

Fig. 3. AUCs from different methods grouped by ADEs. AUCs are plotted as means with 95% CI. *This is the best setting for raw PS set, where β = 0.8 is used for
retrofitting, together with aer2vec and subword embeddings.
Table 9
Top 10 closest drugs with acute myocardial infarction in 4 embedding spaces trained on the Primary Suspect (PS) subset of the data. For the best-performing model
(retrofit - bottom right panel), the retrofitting β parameter = 0.8. STD indicates the standardized set. RAW indicates the minimally preprocessed set. SigScalar indicates
the sigmoid function of the scalar product between the relevant drug and ADE representations.
STD-PS base aer2vec

Drug

SigScalar

Drug

RAW-PS base aer2vec

SigScalar

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

rofecoxib
reteplase
tirofiban
bivalirudin
heparin
prasugrel
digoxin
streptokinase
cilostazol
ticagrelor

0.828
0.589
0.565
0.543
0.502
0.499
0.497
0.48
0.455
0.434

avandia
amn107
prasugrel_hydrochloride
tasigna
digoxin
polygam_s/d
amn107_amn + cap
retevase
heparin_sodium_injection
reteplase_(reteplase

0.776
0.773
0.674
0.666
0.652
0.625
0.624
0.608
0.606
0.606

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

RAW-PS aer2vec subword
Drug
avandia
amn107
prasugrel_hydrochloride
tasigna
amn107_amn + cap
vioxx
aggrastat
digoxin
heparin_sodium_injection
retevase

SigScalar
0.785
0.733
0.709
0.664
0.652
0.64
0.639
0.625
0.621
0.619

RAW-PS aer2vec subword retrofit
Drug
amn107
amn107_amn + cap
heparin_sodium_injection
retevase
polygam_s/d
reteplase_(reteplase
posicor
blinded;_abcixima
novoseven
pletal

SigScalar
0.733
0.652
0.621
0.619
0.612
0.593
0.511
0.507
0.494
0.48

Fig. 4a (an expansion of Fig. 2b) shows the performance of aer2vec
with and without retrofitting. Performance on the filtered raw FULL set
still exceeds that on the standardized set, indicating that this improve­
ment is not attributable to the effect of duplicate reports. The removal of
approximately one million duplicated reports does not harm perfor­
mance for aer2vec with or without retrofitting, or ROR. Rather, per­
formance with all of these methods improves slightly, indicating that the
duplicated reports constitute noise rather than meaningful signal. It is

Table 10
Counts of different forms of Vioxx (rofecoxib) in reports.

“rofecoxib”
“rofecoxib_50_mg
“vioxx”

Standardized (PS)

Raw (PS)

35,714
0
0

39
2
65,730

9

X. Ding et al.

10

0.649

0.639
leponex_/_clozaril_
(clozapine)_lex + tab
0.549

leponex_/_clozaril_
(clozapine
zoton_(lansporazole
0.570

0.555

amisulpride_
(amisulpride
leponex_/_clozaril_
(clozapine)_lex + tab
0.557

carbidopa_/ _entacapone_/
_levodopa_oral_tablet
10

0.454

procyclidine

0.484

leponex_/_clozaril_
(clozapine)_lex + tab
olanzapine
0.487
risperidone
olanzapine
9

0.455

0.491
0.488
haloperidol
iloperidone
perphenazine
risperidone
7
8

0.466
0.460

0.639

0.679

0.721
0.682

clozaril_(clozapine
leponex_/_clozaril_
(clozapine
leponex_/_clozaril
0.719
0.666
fazaclo_odt
leponex_/_clozaril
0.598
0.594
olanzapine
leponex_/_clozaril
0.606
0.558

0.747
fazaclo_odt

0.994
0.990
0.825
fazaclo
clozaril
leponex
0.990
0.990
0.762

clozapine
clozapine_tablets
1.000
0.993

0.761
leponex
0.622
0.613

leponex_/ _clozaril_
(clozapine
leponex_/_clozaril
zoton_(lansporazole
0.492
maprotiline

The results of our experiments confirm the advantages of distributed
representations as compared with traditional statistical methods methods that are in current use for pharmacovigilance signal detection.
In our experiments, using unaugmented aer2vec embeddings to reca­
pitulate the training objective of the model, P(drug|ADE), outperformed
PRR and ROR statistics on the OMOP evaluation set, which is consistent
with prior results [18,22]. The current work goes beyond these previous
experiments by evaluating the utility of the aer2vec model in the
context of both standardized and minimally preprocessed data. While
moving from standardized to minimally preprocessed (raw) data is
detrimental to the performance of disproportionality metrics, aer2vecbased models are not adversely affected by the lack of standardization,
and even improve in performance in this setting. The finding that dis­
proportionality metrics benefit more from standardization is expected,
on account of their inability to draw connections between different ways
of referring to the same drug in a report. For example paroxetine has
several forms beyond the generic form in the original FAERS dataset,
including “PARoxetine hydrochloride 10 MG”, “PARoxetine hydro­
chloride 10 MG Oral Tablet”, and brand names such as “Brisdelle”,

0.473

4. Discussion

chlorpromazine

Table 13
Top 10 closest drugs to “clozapine” (mean cosine similarities across 10 iterations).

1.000
0.791

also noteworthy that after de-duplication, ROR with the raw set now
performs better than that with the standardized set, which is not the case
with the unfiltered raw set.
Fig. 4b shows the performance of aer2vec, subword embedding,
and retrofitting. In comparison of Fig. 2b, the patterns of subword
embedding and retrofitting remain the same, with comparable AUCs as
well. Both models on two raw sets outperform the one on the stan­
dardized set (Fig. 2a).
These results also indicate that unlike ROR, aer2vec is relatively
resistant to data redundancy, as performance with the raw set exceeds
performance with the standardized set irrespective of this filtering step,
and remains comparable with or without it.

6

0.955

0.798
0.695
0.623

0.981

clozaril
fazaclo_odt
leponex_/_clozaril_
(clozapine
clozaril_(clozapine

0.991

0.746
0.685
0.668

0.970

leponex
clozaril_(clozapine
fazaclo_odt

0.986

0.543
0.529
0.524

0.993

amisulpride
chlorpromazine
theophylline

0.295

0.578
0.493
0.489

0.639

amisulpride
iloperidone
procyclidine

0.684

3
4
5

0.404

clozapine
clozapine_tablets (N =
8)
fazaclo (N = 24)
clozaril
clozaril_(clozapine

0.662

1.000
0.799

0.603

clozapine
leponex

NA

clozapine
clozaril

NA

1.000
0.679

NA

clozapine
ziconotide_acetate

(“vioxx”,
“rofecoxib_50_mg”)

1.000
0.662

RAW-PS
aer2vec,
subword,
retrofit β =
0.8

(“rofecoxib”,
“vioxx”)

RAW-PS, aer2vec, subword

STD-PS base
aer2vec
RAW-PS base
aer2vec
RAW-PS
aer2vec,
subword
RAW-PS
aer2vec,
retrofit β =
0.8

(“rofecoxib”,
“rofecoxib_50_mg”)

RAW-PS aer2vec, retrofit β =
0.8

Table 12
Cosine similarities between different forms of Vioxx (means across 10
iterations).

clozapine
ziconotide_acetate

NA
0.481
0.640
0.385

1
2

“vioxx”

NA
0.050
0.045
0.219

RAW-PS base aer2vec

“rofecoxib_50_mg”

STD-PS aer2vec, subword

“rofecoxib”
0.828
0.406
0.335
0.303

STD-PS base aer2vec

STD-PS base aer2vec
RAW-PS base aer2vec
RAW-PS aer2vec, subword
RAW-PS aer2vec, subword,
retrofit β = 0.8

RAW-PS aer2vec, subword, retrofit
β = 0.8

Table 11
Sigscalar similarities between different forms of Vioxx(Rofecoxib) and acute
myocardial infarction.

1.000
0.994

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

X. Ding et al.

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

Fig. 4. Additional results of models training on filtered raw FULL set. (a) base aer2vec trained on 3 datasets: raw FULL, filtered raw FULL, standardized FULL; (b)
aer2vec trained on filtered raw FULL set, with and without subword embedding.

“Paxil”, and “Pexeva”[42]. Failure to capture related forms directly re­
duces capacity for signal detection, as shown in the decrease of perfor­
mance with PRR and ROR (where only counts are used), when extensive
preprocessing is not applied. Though it seems intuitive that this would
be the case, it is interesting to note that ROR performance with the
deduplicated raw FULL set is slightly better than with the standardized
equivalent, suggesting that with this evaluation set, this filtering step
may play a greater role in improving performance than standardization
of drug terms. Nonetheless, as is apparent from examining the case of
“rofecoxib” (Table 10), the exact match required by ROR results in a
distortion of the 2 × 2 table used for calculation, omitting the vast ma­
jority of reports in which the drug is named by its brand name, “Vioxx”.
This is likely to result in inaccurate estimates in many cases, and would
be particularly harmful in the case of emerging side effects where re­
ports using the generic name may not exist. In contrast, aer2vec takes a
distributional approach, where drugs appearing in similar contexts
develop similar representations. Consequently models can utilize signal
disseminated across the variant forms of a drug. However, it is not
immediately apparent why distributional methods would improve their
performance in the absence of standardization. One possible reason for
this may involve data loss in cases in which terminological mapping
during the standardization step was not possible.
Subword embedding, as a way to incorporate orthographic infor­
mation about drugs, improves the performance of the aer2vec model.
With the construction of subword embeddings, drugs with similar names
are represented similarly. This is useful in the context of drug names, on
account of their systematized nomenclature. For example, the stan­
dardized names of COX-2 inhibitors generally end with the suffix
“coxib”. However, we found that generic forms were seldom used in the
raw set, with trade names predominating in the most frequently re­
ported drug terms. Trade names often deviate from the meaningful
patterns of orthographic similarity that characterize the names of
generic drugs. As a consequence, the generic forms following naming
conventions found in the standardized set may provide a better source of
orthographic information than the raw set. Additionally, inspection of
the nearest neighboring drugs to the subword embeddings themselves
suggests that distributional information may dilute orthographic infor­
mation during the course of training, especially when orthographically
similar drugs are scarcely reported. For example, the subword embed­
ding representation for the 5-gram ‘coxib’ is similar to vectors repre­
senting other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, in addition to the
Cox-2 inhibitor (-coxib) group. While performance improvements with
the incorporation of subword embeddings were statistically significant
on two of the reference subsets only, performance improved across all

four subsets, and advantages over PRR and ROR statistics were retained.
Therefore, we would recommend the use of subword embeddings when
developing distributed representations of AER data for pharmacovigi­
lance purposes.
Retrofitting improved aer2vec performance with the raw FAERS
training set (for both the FULL set, and the PS subset). However, this was
not the case with the standardized sets, where performance decreased
with retrofitting (or remained stable and then decreased) as shown in
Table 6. This is not surprising, as both retrofitting and terminologically
driven standardization offer means to leverage lexical knowledge to
improve pharmacovigilance signal detection, and it seems intuitive that
applying both methods would be redundant. As performance with the
raw training set benefits from retrofitting, this shows that the lexical
information from RxNorm serves as a complement to distributional in­
formation learned from the data directly, which in our case includes data
from spontaneous reports but excludes drug classes, relations, and hi­
erarchy, just as most distributional semantics algorithms don’t take
lexical knowledge beyond the training corpus into account. These ex­
periments also considered the role of the β hyperparameter of the ret­
rofitting method, with optimal values for this parameter varying across
training data set configurations. While it isn’t necessarily the case that
the optimal setting for performance on the OMOP set would generalize
to other evaluation settings, it is interesting to note that the optimal
performance with the FULL set (0.6) was close to the algorithm’s default
setting of 0.5, while performance with the PS set was best when
increasing the influence of retrofitting further (β=0.8). This suggests a
greater need for generalization using lexical knowledge in the context of
the relatively limited distributional information provided by this smaller
training set.
An overarching goal of the current work was to evaluate the utility of
combining retrofitting with subword embeddings. When trained on
minimally preprocessed data, this combination led to the best docu­
mented aer2vec performance on the OMOP set to date (AUCs of 0.754
± 0.007 and 0.877 ± 0.004 with the FULL and PS sets respectively). As
one might anticipate given the results with these components individ­
ually, retrofitting did not improve performance over aer2vec with
subword embeddings when trained on the standardized set. However,
performance with this standardized set was exceeded when applying
subword embeddings and retrofitting in the context of minimally pre­
processed data. These results support the hypothesis that this combi­
nation of distributional methods could provide a convenient alternative
to standardization of discrete data elements using terminologically
driven normalization procedures.These findings also provide further
evidence that orthographic information and lexical knowledge are
11

X. Ding et al.

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

complementary to the distributional similarity learned during the pro­
cess of training aer2vec embeddings. This holds true with and without
deduplication of the raw set, indicating that our methods are sufficiently
resistant to redundancy to permit them to maintain much of their per­
formance without this pre-processing procedure.
The overall differences in performance when considering the PS and
FULL sets have been discussed in our previous papers[18,22], and the
conclusions still hold here. The PS set usually provides a significant
improvement in AUC over the FULL set, and this is true for both stan­
dardized and raw FAERS datasets, as well as in almost all configurations
of subword embeddings and retrofitting. Given the nature of this PS
label, it is clear that the expert knowledge that informs the physician or
reporter’s designation of suspicion, or perhaps their ability to access
broader contextual information concerning the patient’s medical his­
tory, plays an important role in filtering out unrelated or even
misleading information in the same report. While this does introduce the
potential for additional bias beyond the well-documented reporting
biases inherent in these data (such as [43]), the improvements in per­
formance demonstrated when considering these reporter designations of
suspicion at a minimum suggests a need for further investigation into the
circumstances under which they might be advantageous for postmarketing signal detection.
When evaluating performance with individual ADEs, the findings
vary. When augmenting aer2vec with lexical or orthographic infor­
mation, performance generally increases, with the greatest improve­
ments observed when using subword embeddings in acute myocardial
infarction, and the largest retrofitting effect in acute hepatic failure.
Upon qualitative evaluation of the predictions for acute MI across
models, drug name variants such as Avandia and AMN107 predominate
in the raw set, as opposed to generic forms in the standardized set. The
specific example of Vioxx showed that lexical information is helpful,
while orthographic information is not, in discovering potentially underreported forms of Vioxx (eg, “rofecoxib_50_mg” with N = 2 in the raw
set), but sometimes at the expense of diluting the signal from the
predominantly-reported forms of drugs (Table 11). However, while
qualitative evaluation does provide some insight into how model vari­
ants selectively emphasize different results in particular cases, it is also
the case that both subword embedding and retrofitting improve overall
performance.
The approaches proposed in this paper can assist the process of
assessing adverse event reports for the purpose of regulatory decision
making. Our experimental results show that our model can improve
upon the current process in several ways: (1) the resulting enriched
distributional methods perform better in our evaluations than countbased signal detection methods in current use, and could be
substituted for them directly; (2) our methods minimize the need for
extensive pre-processing, enhancing efficiency; (3) signal that may be
dispersed in raw data can be aggregated using distributional, taxonomic
and orthographic similarity; (4) the resulting improvements in effi­
ciency and signal aggregation could mediate real-time monitoring of
FAERS reports.
Moreover, better drug and ADE representations can mediate im­
provements in performance on other tasks, such as drug repurposing,
predictive modeling of EHR data, and derivation of patient representa­
tions from such data. Integration of taxonomic knowledge has estab­
lished benefits in these areas. For example, Ramsy et al. showed that
with logistic regression models, representing features using terminol­
ogies with finer-grained representations was associated with better
performances when predicting diabetes, heart failure and pancreatic
cancer[44]. Our methods provide a convenient way to integrate such
knowledge into distributed representations of ADE reports, with the
potential to enhance their utility for downstream machine learning. As
another example, estimates of the similarity between drugs based on
their side-effect profiles have been shown to carry information that is
useful for drug repurposing, because drugs with similar adverse effects
may have similar therapeutic effects also. For example, the PREDICT

approach of Gottlieb et al.[45] and the SPACE approach of Liu et al.[46]
both use side-effect profile derived drug-drug similarities to build pre­
dictive models for drug repurposing. Our representations can fit natu­
rally into this scenario in that drug-drug similarities emerge directly
from the cosine similarities between aer2vec vector representations.
Some limitations of this work emerge from the training dataset,
FAERS, where reported drug/ADE relationships do not necessarily imply
causality. For example, researchers found that complaints in FAERS
about 5-alpha reductase inhibitors were contradictory to established
ADEs from long-term controlled studies[47]. FAERS reports also lack
contextual information (such as the temporal sequence of events) that is
pertinent to evaluation. In addition, reporting biases may influence
which ADEs or drugs are or aren’t reported. Examples include underreporting for statin-related events[48], and that an FDA alert concern­
ing two diabetic medications was followed by changes in reporting
trends for pancreatitis[49].
Additional limitations stem from the OMOP evaluation set, which
has been criticized for its emphasis on well established ADEs, at the
expense of including emerging or novel ones[50]. As a result, with
limited testing examples, the OMOP set does not provide an indication of
a model’s ability to detect ADEs that are not already well-known, and
the OMOP set does not provide the means to assess the accuracy of
highly ranked predictions for ADEs that it does not contain.
One way to address these limitations is through experimental design,
and the method we used for the current work was to place temporal
constraints on the data (up to 2012 Q4) to simulate a condition in which
data from the past are used to detect events reported in the “future”.
However, this does not fully address concerns about the OMOP set, as
the side effects it describes were already well established at the point at
which the set was released. It is also possible to derive more granular
time limits, by using variable time spans before publicly recognized
ADEs or changes in labels for a drug. This would permit a predictive
model to be evaluated for its sensitivity to emerging ADEs[51].
Another limitation is that we did not apply subword embeddings and
retrofitting to represent adverse events, restricting these methods to
drug representations. This decision was motivated by the observation
that adverse events are already recorded in FAERS in a standardized
manner, using MedDRA. Consequently, there is less dissemination of
signal across variant forms of these side effects. Nonetheless, we antic­
ipate that incorporating lexical and orthographic information will be of
value here also, and will evaluate this hypothesis in our future work.
A further limitation related to subword embeddings involves noise
present in the “raw” data set. With minimal preprocessing of drugs,
there are cases in which series of spaces (N = 41, 072 for three or more
consecutive spaces) are converted to underscores. Examples include
“modopar___________(benserazide _hydrochloride,_levodopa” and “neo­
clarityn_(desloratadine)_tablets_____like_cla-rityn”. Noise of this sort ob­
scures information about meaningful subwords, and will impair
performance of the algorithm. As mentioned in the Methods Section,
trailing special characters are removed during preprocessing, and a
similar approach could be applied to repeated intervening special
characters (with precautions) to reduce noise. An additional limitation
related to the retrofitting algorithm is that the hyper parameter (β) is
determined empirically, with optimal values determined on the basis of
the training data. A universal value of β = 0.5 is not appropriate for all
scenarios, though the close-to-optimal performance with this value on
the FULL dataset suggests this remains a reasonable first approximation.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we show that the aer2vec method of generating
distributed representations of drugs and ADEs further improves its
advantage in performance over disproportionality methods - methods
that are in current use for pharmacovigilance signal detection - when
trained on data where drug terms have not been mapped to a stan­
dardized vocabulary. In comparison with previous work [18,22], the
12

X. Ding et al.

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

current models have the best performance documented to date, with
0.754 ± 0.002 (vs 0.742 ± 0.008) on the FULL set and 0.877 ± 0.001 (vs
0.858 ± 0.005) on the PS set, while trained on raw FAERS and
employing less data than used in previous experiments. This indicates
that minimal preprocessing of the FAERS dataset is sufficient when
distributed representations are used, and may even be advantageous for
pharmacovigilance signal detection, demonstrating the potential to
obviate the need for extensive preprocessing. This feature becomes
especially important for live surveillance or large data.
In addition our results demonstrate that subword embeddings and
retrofitting are effective methods to incorporate orthographic and lexi­
cal information into the resulting embeddings, with further improve­
ments in performance on a pharmacovigilance signal detection tasks.
These methods are complementary, with best performance overall ob­
tained when combining them to augment aer2vec in the context of
minimally preprocessed data. Taken together, these results demonstrate
the potential of these methods to obviate the need for extensive pre­
processing of adverse event data for pharmacovigilance applications.

[13] H.J. Duggirala, J.M. Tonning, E. Smith, R.A. Bright, J.D. Baker, R. Ball, C. Bell, S.
J. Bright-Ponte, T. Botsis, K. Bouri, et al., Use of data mining at the food and drug
administration, J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 23 (2) (2016) 428–434.
[14] M. Sardella, C. Lungu, Evaluation of quantitative signal detection in eudravigilance
for orphan drugs: possible risk of false negatives, Therapeutic advances in drug
safety 10 (2019), 2042098619882819.
[15] T. Cohen, D. Widdows, Empirical distributional semantics: methods and
biomedical applications, Journal of biomedical informatics 42 (2) (2009) 390–405.
[16] P.D. Turney, P. Pantel, From frequency to meaning: Vector space models of
semantics, Journal of artificial intelligence research 37 (2010) 141–188.
[17] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G.S. Corrado, J. Dean, Distributed
representations of words and phrases and their compositionality, in: Advances in
neural information processing systems, 2013, pp. 3111–3119.
[18] J. Portanova, N. Murray, J. Mower, D. Subramanian, T. Cohen, aer2vec:
Distributed representations of adverse event reporting system data as a means to
identify drug/side-effect associations, BioRxiv (2019) 780544, https://doi.org/
10.1101/780544.
[19] N.L. of Medicine, Rxnorm project, Accessed: 2020–09-23 (2020). https://www.
nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/rxnorm/.
[20] M. Faruqui, J. Dodge, S.K. Jauhar, C. Dyer, E. Hovy, N.A. Smith, Retrofitting word
vectors to semantic lexicons, in: Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, 2015, pp. 1606–1615.
[21] George A. Miller, WordNet: a lexical database for English, Communications of the
ACM 38 (11) (1995) 39–41.
[22] X. Ding, T. Cohen, Retrofitting vector representations of adverse event reporting
data to structured knowledge to improve pharmacovigilance signal detection, To
appear: Proc AMIA Annu Symp 2020.
[23] J.M. Banda, L. Evans, R.S. Vanguri, N.P. Tatonetti, P.B. Ryan, N.H. Shah, A curated
and standardized adverse drug event resource to accelerate drug safety research,
Scientific data 3 (1) (2016) 1–11, https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.26.
[24] P. Bojanowski, E. Grave, A. Joulin, T. Mikolov, Enriching word vectors with
subword information, Transactions of the Association for, Computational
Linguistics 5 (2017) 135–146.
[25] U. Food, D. Administration, Surveillance: Post drug-approval activities, Accessed:
2020-09-23 (2018). URL https://www.fda.gov/drugs/guidance-complianceregulatory-information/surveillance.
[26] U. Food, D. Administration, Questions and answers on fda’s adverse event
reporting system (faers), Accessed: 2020-09-23 (2018). URL https://www.fda.gov/
drugs/surveillance/questions-and-answers-fdas-adverse-event-reporting-systemfaers.
[27] D. Graham, S. Ahmad, T. Piazza-heep, Pharmacovigilance, 2nd edition, John Wiley
& Sons, 2007.
[28] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, J. Dean, Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space. 1st Int Conf Learn Represent ICLR 2013—Work
Track Proc. 2013; 1–12.
[29] D. Widdows, K. Ferraro, Semantic vectors: a scalable open source package and
online technology management application., in: LREC, 2008.
[30] D. Widdows, T. Cohen, The semantic vectors package: New algorithms and public
tools for distributional semantics, in: 2010 IEEE Fourth International Conference
on Semantic Computing, IEEE, 2010, pp. 9–15. doi:10.1109/ICSC.2010.94.
[31] Z. Yu, B.C. Wallace, T. Johnson, T. Cohen, Retrofitting concept vector
representations of medical concepts to improve estimates of semantic similarity
and relatedness, Studies in health technology and informatics 245 (2017) 657.
[32] IUPAC, Nomenclature, Accessed: 2020–09-25. https://iupac.org/what-we-do/
nomenclature/.
[33] WHO, International nonproprietary names, Accessed: 2020-09-25 (2017). URL
https://www.who.int/medicines/services/inn/en/.
[34] U. Food, D. Administration, Use of drug name terms policy, Accessed: 2020-09-25
(2014). URL https://www.fda.gov/drugs/data-standards-manual-monographs/
use-drug-name-terms-policy.
[35] T. Mikolov, É. Grave, P. Bojanowski, C. Puhrsch, A. Joulin, Advances in pretraining distributed word representations. In Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018)
2018 May.
[36] T. Cohen, D. Widdows, Bringing order to neural word embeddings with
embeddings augmented by random permutations (earp), in: Proceedings of the
22nd Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, 2018,
pp. 465–475.
[37] U.L. of Medicine, Generic name stems, Accessed: 2020-09-25 (2020). URL https://
druginfo.nlm.nih.gov/drugportal/jsp/drugportal/DrugNameGenericStems.jsp.
[38] P.B. Ryan, M.J. Schuemie, E. Welebob, J. Duke, S. Valentine, A.G. Hartzema,
Defining a reference set to support methodological research in drug safety, Drug
safety 36 (1) (2013) 33–47, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40264-013-0097-8.
[39] S.E. Nissen, K. Wolski, Effect of rosiglitazone on the risk of myocardial infarction
and death from cardiovascular causes, N. Engl. J. Med. 356 (24) (2007)
2457–2471, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa072761.
[40] T.D. Kim, P. Le Coutre, M. Schwarz, P. Grille, M. Levitin, S. Fateh-Moghadam, F.J.
Giles, B. Dörken, W. Haverkamp, C. Köhncke, Clinical cardiac safety profile of
nilotinib, haematologica 97 (6) (2012) 883–889. doi:10.3324/
haematol.2011.058776.
[41] E.J. Topol, Failing the public health—rofecoxib, merck, and the fda, N. Engl. J.
Med. 351 (17) (2004) 1707–1709.
[42] U.N.L. of Medicine, Rxnav, Accessed: 2020–09-26. https://mor.nlm.nih.gov/
RxNav/.

Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by U.S. National Library of Medicine Grant
(R01LM011563).
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the
online version, at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2021.103833.
References
[1] I.H.T. Guideline, Clinical safety data management: definitions and standards for
expedited reporting e2a, in: International conference on harmonisation of technical
requirements for registration of pharmaceuticals for human use, 1994.
[2] R. Kaushal, D.W. Bates, C. Landrigan, K.J. McKenna, M.D. Clapp, F. Federico, D.
A. Goldmann, Medication errors and adverse drug events in pediatric inpatients,
Jama 285 (16) (2001) 2114–2120, https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.285.16.2114.
[3] D.W. Bates, N. Spell, D.J. Cullen, E. Burdick, N. Laird, L.A. Petersen, S.D. Small, B.
J. Sweitzer, L.L. Leape, The costs of adverse drug events in hospitalized patients,
Jama 277 (4) (1997) 307–311, https://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.1997.03540280045032.
[4] P. Aspden, P. Aspden, Preventing medication errors, Press, National Acad, 2007.
[5] I. Edwards, C. Biriell, Pharmacovigilance, 2nd edition, John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
[6] U. Food, D. Administration, Fda adverse events reporting system (faers) public
dashboard, Accessed: 2021-01-27 (2021). URL https://fis.fda.gov/sense/app/
d10be6bb-494e-4cd2-82e4-0135608ddc13/sheet/7a47a261-d58b-4203-a8aa6d3021737452/state/analysis.
[7] S.J. Evans, P.C. Waller, S. Davis, Use of proportional reporting ratios (prrs) for
signal generation from spontaneous adverse drug reaction reports,
Pharmacoepidemiology and drug safety 10 (6) (2001) 483–486, https://doi.org/
10.1002/pds.677.
[8] K.J. Rothman, S. Lanes, S.T. Sacks, The reporting odds ratio and its advantages over
the proportional reporting ratio, Pharmacoepidemiology and drug safety 13 (8)
(2004) 519–523, https://doi.org/10.1002/pds.1001.
[9] A. Szarfman, J.M. Tonning, P.M. Doraiswamy, Pharmacovigilance in the 21st
century: new systematic tools for an old problem, Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of
Human Pharmacology and Drug Therapy 24 (9) (2004) 1099–1104. doi:10.1592/
phco.24.13.1099.38090.
[10] Z. Xu, T. Kass-Hout, C. Anderson-Smits, G. Gray, Signal detection using change
point analysis in postmarket surveillance, pharmacoepidemiology and drug safety,
24, 2015, pp. 663–668.
[11] T. Botsis, T. Buttolph, M.D. Nguyen, S. Winiecki, E.J. Woo, R. Ball, Vaccine adverse
event text mining system for extracting features from vaccine safety reports, J. Am.
Med. Inform. Assoc. 19 (6) (2012) 1011–1018.
[12] U. Food, D. Administration, Data mining at fda – white paper, Accessed: 2020-0928 (2018). URL https://www.fda.gov/science-research/data-mining/data-miningfda-white-paper.

13

X. Ding et al.

Journal of Biomedical Informatics 119 (2021) 103833

[43] A. Pariente, F. Gregoire, A. Fourrier-Reglat, F. Haramburu, N. Moore, Impact of
safety alerts on measures of disproportionality in spontaneous reporting databases
the notoriety bias, Drug safety 30 (10) (2007) 891–898.
[44] L. Rasmy, F. Tiryaki, Y. Zhou, Y. Xiang, C. Tao, H. Xu, D. Zhi, Representation of ehr
data for predictive modeling: a comparison between umls and other terminologies,
J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 27 (10) (2020) 1593–1599.
[45] A. Gottlieb, G.Y. Stein, E. Ruppin, R. Sharan, Predict: a method for inferring novel
drug indications with application to personalized medicine, Molecular systems
biology 7 (1) (2011) 496.
[46] Z. Liu, F. Guo, J. Gu, Y. Wang, Y. Li, D. Wang, L. Lu, D. Li, F. He, Similarity-based
prediction for anatomical therapeutic chemical classification of drugs by
integrating multiple data sources, Bioinformatics 31 (11) (2015) 1788–1795.
[47] W.R. Baas, M.J. Butcher, A. Lwin, B. Holland, M. Herberts, J. Clemons, K. Delfino,
S. Althof, T.S. Kohler, K.T. McVary, A review of the faers data on 5-alpha reductase

[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]

14

inhibitors: implications for postfinasteride syndrome, Urology 120 (2018)
143–149.
Y.M. Alatawi, R.A. Hansen, Empirical estimation of under-reporting in the us food
and drug administration adverse event reporting system (faers), Expert opinion on
drug safety 16 (7) (2017) 761–767.
K.B. Hoffman, A.R. Demakas, M. Dimbil, N.P. Tatonetti, C.B. Erdman, Stimulated
reporting: the impact of us food and drug administration-issued alerts on the
adverse event reporting system (faers), Drug safety 37 (11) (2014) 971–980.
G.N. Norén, O. Caster, K. Juhlin, M. Lindquist, Zoo or savannah? choice of training
ground for evidence-based pharmacovigilance, Drug safety 37 (9) (2014) 655–659,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40264-014-0198-z.
R. Harpaz, W. DuMouchel, M. Schuemie, O. Bodenreider, C. Friedman, E. Horvitz,
A. Ripple, A. Sorbello, R.W. White, R. Winnenburg, et al., Toward multimodal
signal detection of adverse drug reactions, Journal of biomedical informatics 76
(2017) 41–49.

