International Journal of Medical Informatics (2005) 74, 563—571

Implementation of automated signal generation
in pharmacovigilance using a knowledge-based
approach
Cédric Bousquet a,b, Corneliu Henegar a, Agnès Lillo-Le Louët b,
Patrice Degoulet a, Marie-Christine Jaulent a,∗
a

INSERM U729, Faculté de médecine Broussais Hôtel Dieu, 15 rue de l’Ecole de Médecine,
75006 Paris, France
b Centre Régional de Pharmacovigilance, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris
Received 29 October 2004 ; received in revised form 17 March 2005; accepted 6 April 2005
KEYWORDS
Adverse drug reaction
reporting systems;
Terminology;
Automatic data
processing;
Knowledge
representation
(computer);
Description logic;
Ontological modeling

Summary Automated signal generation is a growing ﬁeld in pharmacovigilance that
relies on data mining of huge spontaneous reporting systems for detecting unknown
adverse drug reactions (ADR). Previous implementations of quantitative techniques
did not take into account issues related to the medical dictionary for regulatory
activities (MedDRA) terminology used for coding ADRs. MedDRA is a ﬁrst generation
terminology lacking formal deﬁnitions; grouping of similar medical conditions is not
accurate due to taxonomic limitations.
Our objective was to build a data-mining tool that improves signal detection algorithms by performing terminological reasoning on MedDRA codes described with the
DAML + OIL description logic. We propose the PharmaMiner tool that implements
quantitative techniques based on underlying statistical and bayesian models. It is a
JAVA application displaying results in tabular format and performing terminological
reasoning with the Racer inference engine.
The mean frequency of drug-adverse effect associations in the French database
was 2.66. Subsumption reasoning based on MedDRA taxonomical hierarchy produced
a mean number of occurrence of 2.92 versus 3.63 (p < 0.001) obtained with a combined technique using subsumption and approximate matching reasoning based on
the ontological structure. Semantic integration of terminological systems with data
mining methods is a promising technique for improving machine learning in medical
databases.
© 2005 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
∗

Corresponding author. Tel.: +33 1 42 34 69 86.
E-mail addresses: cedric.bousquet@spim.jussieu.fr
(C. Bousquet), marie-christine.jaulent@spim.jussieu.fr
(M.-C. Jaulent).

The World Health Organization (WHO) deﬁnes a signal in pharmacovigilance as ‘‘any reported information on a possible causal relationship between

1386-5056/$ — see front matter © 2005 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2005.04.006

564
an adverse event and a drug, the relationship being
unknown or incompletely documented previously’’
[1]. Manual screening of whole pharmacovigilance
databases for signal detection becomes no more
feasible due to large collections of pharmacovigilance cases. The WHO Uppsala Monitoring Center
collects case reports from 67 participating countries and owns a huge database of three million case
reports. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
in the United States manages the adverse event
reporting system (AERS) that contains more than
two million case reports. This database is growing
fast, 250,000 new cases are entered every year.
The WHO [2] and the FDA [3] are currently
using automated detection algorithms based upon
Bayesian analysis in order to achieve signal generation. Evans et al. propose proportional reporting ratios for signal detection in the adverse drug
reactions on-line information tracking (ADROIT)
database in the United Kingdom [4]. Van Puijenbroek is investigating the use of reporting odds
ratios and logistic regression for detecting drugdrug interactions in the Lareb pharmacovigilance
center in The Netherlands [5]. The pharmaceutical
industry is investigating the interest of automated
methods.
The objective is to support pharmacovigilance
experts for signal detection. A recent evaluation of
the WHO Bayesian approach showed good overall
sensitivity but rather low speciﬁcity [6]. One limitation is the small number of occurrences of each
drug-event association in the database [7]. Moreover, performances of these quantitative methods are limited by the fact that they do not take
into account the semantic information existing in
the controlled vocabularies used to code adverse
events in case reports.
The medical dictionary for regulatory activities
(MedDRA) is a new terminology currently used for
recording and reporting adverse drug event data
in most countries [8]. It has already been adopted
for the coding of adverse effects in pharmacovigilance databases of many governmental organizations and pharmacovigilance units in the pharmaceutical industry. This terminology proposes many
terms and a ﬁne granularity, which allows to code in
a precise way descriptions of adverse effects such
as they are described by physicians.
The part of the medical informatics community involved in developing terminologies is moving towards the supply of third generation systems
according to Rossi-Mori’s classiﬁcation [9]. Desiderata were proposed by Cimino for the development
of new medical terminologies [10]. We showed in a
previous study that MedDRA does not commit to several desiderata and is a ﬁrst generation system [11].

C. Bousquet et al.
It organizes terms in several system organ classes
(SOCs) but is not really multi-axial. Terms are not
described in a formal way by means of a description
logic. Grouping of terms by the means of high level
categories is not accurate. MedDRA would beneﬁt
from formal deﬁnitions in an adverse drug reaction
terminology.
In this paper, we present an original approach
meant to improve signal detection. We built a
tool (‘‘PharmaMiner’’) that performs terminological reasoning among drug-event pairs to group
semantically linked adverse events and applies
Bayesian (information component) and statistical
analysis methods on these groups to detect potential signals. The terminological reasoning relies on
a formal ontology of adverse events built from MedDRA. We report comparative results obtained on
a subset of the French national Pharmacovigilance
database while applying ﬁrst grouping of cases with
the MedDRA terminology and second terminological
reasoning within an ontological structure.

2. Background
2.1. MedDRA
The MedDRA hierarchy is organized in ﬁve levels as
follows [8]: system organ class, high level group
terms (HLGT), high level terms (HLT), preferred
terms (PT) and low level terms (LLT). The PT and
HLT levels are recommended for signal generation
and the LLT level for coding adverse events. The
September 2002 version (5.1) of MedDRA comprises
26 SOCs, 332 HLGTs, 1683 HLTs, 16102 PTs and 56981
LLTs.
The ﬁner granularity of MedDRA terms to
describe medical data compared to other terminologies (WHO-ART, COSTART) implies less occurrences of a given drug-event association within the
database, and lowers the performance of automated signal detection algorithms. Some studies have argued that an automatic grouping of
cases expressing similar medical conditions would
increase the power of the detection algorithms
[12,13].
Moreover, there is no formal representation of
MedDRA terms. The multiaxiality of MedDRA is limited to the fact that a PT can belong to several
SOCs and cannot be compared to the mutiaxial
properties of other terminological systems such
as SNOMED, which allows multiple views on data
according to the axis (morphological, topographic,
etc.) [14]. Special search categories (collections of
PTs assembled from various SOCs) have been introduced in MedDRA to group terms with close meaning

Implementation of automated signal generation in pharmacovigilance
to ensure that cases are not inadvertently missed
when searching a database. However, these categories have to be ﬁlled manually and this process
would beneﬁt of an automated classiﬁcation based
on semantic deﬁnitions of MedDRA terms.

2.2. Formal deﬁnitions with description
logics
Description logics (DL) are a family of formal languages that are a subset of ﬁrst order logic and
that provide for an object-oriented like structure
of concept deﬁnitions. The entities (concepts and
roles) can be primitive or deﬁned, primitive entities, comparable to atoms, allowing the construction of deﬁned entities. Concepts are organized in
a hierarchy by a relation of subsumption (noted
⊆), which orders them according to generality of
their semantic content, every concept being consisted of an appropriate description, deﬁned by
local properties and a description shared with its
subsumers. The DL offers the possibility of describing a concept by necessary properties (primitive
concept) or by necessary and sufﬁcient properties (deﬁned concept). For example, the complex
concept ‘‘Hepatitis’’ (liver inﬂammation) may be
deﬁned by the following expression:
Hepatitis ≡ (isStructuralDisorderOf some
HepaticStructuralLevels)

and

(hasTypeOfDisordersomeInﬂamation)
In the above expression ‘‘isStructuralDisorderOf’’ and ‘‘hasTypeOfDisorder’’ are relations and
‘‘HepaticStructuralLevels’’ and ‘‘Inﬂamation’’ are
primitive concepts. DL-based knowledge bases generally consist of a terminology box (T-Box) and an
assertion box (A-Box). The T-Box contains the collection of axioms deﬁning concepts. The instances
are declared in the A-Box by the means of assertions
like ‘‘instance X is a member of class C’’. In our context, concepts related to ADR terms are deﬁned in
the T-Box and ADRs from the database are assigned
to the corresponding concepts in the A-Box.

2.3. Formal ontology of MedDRA terms
We used the OilEd ontology editor [15] to provide
semantic deﬁnitions of MedDRA terms. The knowledge representation language was the SHIQ description logic (DAML + OIL language) [16]. We built a formal ontology comprising 392 primitive concepts and
42 roles [17]. The hierarchy of primitive concepts
included self-standing concepts (types of disorders,
physiological functions, pathogenic agents, physi-

565

cal structural levels) and reﬁning concepts to reﬁne
complex abstract descriptions of MedDRA terms. We
provided formal deﬁnitions of 530 MedDRA terms.
This ontology was covering only a small part of
MedDRA. It was however sufﬁcient to describe our
test database, an extract from the French pharmacovigilance database. This extract was coded with
the WHO-ART terminology that contains much less
terms than MedDRA and a mapping between WHOART and MedDRA was necessary in this work.

2.4. Signal detection tools
Statistical techniques for signal detection are well
documented in literature but software implementations are not. The WHO built the information
component algorithm on a neural network architecture that may be distributed on several computers [18]. Case reports are presented to the system
as new batches quarterly. The programming code
is a mixture of C and scheme. The Bayesian conﬁdence propagation neural network (BCPNN) may
be queried by sending e-mails written in SML, a
scheme-compatible markup language. A graphical
query builder has been developed in the Uppsala
Monitoring Center to facilitate the correct formatting and structure of such queries.
DuMouchel proposes the gamma poisson shrinker
(GPS) tool [19]. Files have to be prepared as ﬂat ﬁle
(text) or Excel format. It takes as input a drug-ADR
ﬁle, a drug ﬁle, an ADR ﬁle and a strata ﬁle. This
last ﬁle allows the user to stratify the database into
several categories according to sex, age or groups of
patients. The multi gamma poisson shrinker (MGPS)
algorithm is an extension of GPS that can take into
account multiple objects such as several drugs or
several ADRs at the same time [20]. MGPS is implemented in the Web VDME® (web based visual data
mining environment) tool [21]. It includes a light
client (web browser) and an application server. The
WebVDME® server implements the MGPS algorithm
in C++. Data are stored on an Oracle® database and
HTML pages are generated thanks to the Java Server
Page Tomcat server.
All these tools do not take into account issues
related to grouping of terms. No ontological representation of ADR terms or terminological reasoning
thanks to an inference engine are available.

3. Material
3.1. Data selection
The dataset was an extract from the French Pharmacovigilance database containing 42,284 case

566

C. Bousquet et al.

reports entered between January 2001 and January
2003. Each pharmacovigilance case report comprising several drugs and adverse reactions was broken
into drug-ADR associations. Pharmacovigilance data
was provided as a ﬂat ﬁle containing ﬁelds relevant
to signal detection. Fields were case report identiﬁcation, drug name and Libra code, WHO-ART term
and code. Libra is a drug terminology used by the
French agency to code drug names in pharmacovigilance cases.

3.2. Primary terms selection
In the French database, ADR case reports are coded
with WHO-ART but a new version of the database
including MedDRA is under study. We identiﬁed 846
WHO-ART PTs used to code adverse events in this
subset. From these, we selected 694 equivalent
MedDRA PTs using a table of terminological correspondences between WHO-ART and MedDRA. This
table was established for the purpose of this work
and makes use of the UMLS network.

4. Methods
The PharmaMiner tool was developed in JAVA using
several open source libraries to ensure maximal
portability. It is integrating RACER inference engine
in order to perform terminological reasoning [22].
The methodology for the development of PharmaMiner involved the following steps:
• Developing a signal detection approach integrating terminological reasoning and Bayesian measure for signal generation.
• Developing a user interface, which allows control
of the system.
Three methods of terminological reasoning and
ﬁve measures used for signal detection are impleTable 1

mented in the PharmaMiner tool and summarized in
Table 1.

4.1. Terminological reasoning
Terminological reasoning by subsumption inside the
MedDRA original hierarchy (MedDRA TR) was performed by loading a terminological ontology reproducing the original MedDRA hierarchy. Terminological reasoning by subsumption inside the ontological
structure (ontology TR) used our formal ontology
built from MedDRA terms.
Approximate matching (AM), a terminological
reasoning technique proposed by Horrocks et al.
[23] was used to link cases coded by the means of
abnormal laboratory ﬁndings or symptoms with the
corresponding well-deﬁned pathological entity. Diseases are usually recognized by some typical symptoms and/or abnormal investigation results. It is
not necessary that the patient presents every clinical sign described in the disease deﬁnition. The
diagnosis may be based on a subset of typical symptoms. One way to manage those partial deﬁnitions
in description logics is to deﬁne the concept as a
disjunction of all sets of necessary characteristics.
For example, an hepatitis may be matched
with one of the following disjunctive subsets
of adverse events: (‘‘hyperbilirubinemia’’ and
‘‘ALAT increased’’) or (‘‘ASAT increased’’ and
‘‘cholestasis’’) or (‘‘jaundice’’ and ‘‘cytolysis’’).
Reasoning with disjunctions in description logics
used to be unfeasible due to computational cost.
The new inference engines have been optimized to
manage such disjunctions.

4.2. Grouping of terms
Terminological pre-processing of the data consisted
in grouping similar cases, based on a formal representation of relations between concepts designated

Methods of terminological reasoning and measures of automated signal detection

Terminological methods of pretreatment data
Terminological reasoning by subsumption inside
the MedDRA original hierarchy (MedDRA TR)
Terminological reasoning by subsumption inside
the ontological structure (ontology TR)
Terminological reasoning by subsumption and
approximate matching inside the ontological
structure (ontology TR and AM)
(2 -test,

Measures of automated signal detection
Bayesian

Statistical

WHO Bayesian method
(information component)

2 -test
Reporting odds ratio (ROR)
Proportional reporting ratio
(PRR)
Yule’s Q-test

Each signal detection technique
ROR, PRR, Yule’s Q-test and Information component) was tested in the following
situations: no terminological reasoning, MedDRA TR, ontology TR, ontology TR & AM).

Implementation of automated signal generation in pharmacovigilance
by the terms used during the coding process. The
RACER engine performed simple reasoning by subsumption within the formal ontology. For example, the drug-event pairs associated to the concept
‘‘hepatitis’’ are grouped with pairs associated to
the subsumed concepts (‘‘hepatitis toxic’’, hepatitis fulminant’’, etc.). The terminological reasoning
step groups similar pairs at the various levels of the
formal ontology.

4.3. Signal detection
Within a group, each pair counts for one occurrence of a same drug-event association. A signal
is detected among statistically signiﬁcant associations highlighted by one of the automated signal detection measures (2 -test, reporting odds
ratio [5], proportional reporting ratio [4], Yule’s Qtest, WHO information component [2]). Each signal
detection technique was tested in the following situations: no terminological reasoning, MedDRA TR,
ontology TR, ontology TR & AM).

5. Results
5.1. Software architecture
The software architecture integrates several components (Fig. 1). The main component implements
the ﬁve above signal generation algorithms and
automated queries necessary for terminological
reasoning. The inference engine connects to the

567

system by the means of the TCP/IP protocol. The
knowledge base is built in two steps. First the ontology ﬁle in the DAML + OIL format is loaded in the
T-Box. Second concepts are instantiated with the
corresponding pharmacovigilance cases in the ABox.

5.2. User interface
5.2.1. Data processing
The ﬁrst panel is for data processing. Settings
include the choice of the ontology and data ﬁles,
minimum number of couples for signal generation,
statistical conﬁdence intervals, levels of MedDRA
terms for terminological reasoning (SOC, HLGT, HLT
and PT), reasoner IP address and port. We display
results from a study on case reports entered in the
HEGP (Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou) pharmacovigilance regional center.
Fig. 2 shows drug-ADRs pairs in the HEGP
database grouped by drug name. Each line displays
information on WHO-ART term and code, drug name
and Libra code, number of occurrences. For example, the number of occurrences of the {efavirenz,
fever} association was seven cases. ADRs are coded
by means of a French version of the WHO-ART terminology and ﬁèvre is the translation of the fever
term.
5.2.2. Knowledge base processing
The second panel is used to build and process the
knowledge base. The user may select terminological reasoning and/or approximate matching and

Fig. 1 Software implementation of the PharmaMiner tool.

568

C. Bousquet et al.

Fig. 2 ADR-drugs pairs in the pre-processing panel.

one of the available algorithms. Five runs were
performed by testing 2 , ROR, PRR, Yule’s Q and
information component without terminological reasoning. Then ﬁfteen runs were performed by combining each signal detection technique with one
of the terminological reasoning techniques (MedDRA TR, ontology TR, ontology TR & AM). We show
only results that were obtained with Information
component as terminological reasoning was able to
improve the performance of other techniques in the
same proportion. Fig. 3 shows the list of generated
signals by using the WHO Bayesian method after terminological reasoning and approximate matching.

Every WHO-ART term is replaced by its corresponding MedDRA concept. Each line displays the MedDRA concept and code, the drug name and Libra
code, number of occurrences and information component minus two standard deviations (IC − 2S.D.)
value.
Direct commands in the toolbar allow the user to
connect to the Racer engine, to display the structure of the knowledge base, to display a graph
showing the number of signals by MedDRA SOCs,
and to read the log ﬁle (connection to the inference
engine, processing of data, loading of T-Box/A-Box,
terminological reasoning).

Fig. 3 Approximate matching and terminological reasoning in the build and process knowledge base panel.

Implementation of automated signal generation in pharmacovigilance

569

Fig. 4 Visualization of results with system organ class repartition.

Fig. 4 shows the list of generated signals with
terminological reasoning and the SOC repartition
of these signals. In this example 60 hematological
signals, 38 digestive signals, and 31 dermatological
signals were detected (among others).
The knowledge base may be browsed. Fig. 5
shows on the left side the hierarchy of concepts
(T-Box) and on the right side the corresponding
pharmacovigilance cases (A-Box). For example, the

cholestasis PT may be found in several case reports
such as PB0000181.

5.3. Mean number of occurrences
The mean frequency of drug-adverse effect associations in the French database was 2.66. The
differences between MedDRA/MedDRA RT, MedDRA
RT/Ontology RT and ontology RT/ontology & AM

Fig. 5 The knowledge base browser with T-Box (left side) and A-Box (right side).

570

C. Bousquet et al.

Table 2 Mean number of occurrences with MedDRA
and three methods of terminological reasoning (WHO
information component)
MedDRA
MedDRA RT
Ontology RT
Ontology RT and AM

2.66
2.92
3.24
3.63

occ/{D,
occ/{D,
occ/{D,
occ/{D,

ADR}
ADR}
ADR}
ADR}

were signiﬁcant with each signal detection technique (p < 0.001). With WHO information component, subsumption reasoning based on MedDRA taxonomical hierarchy produced a mean number of
occurrence of 2.92 versus 3.63 (p < 0.001) obtained
with a combined technique using subsumption and
approximate matching reasoning based on the ontological structure (Table 2).

6. Discussion
In this paper, we present PharmaMiner, a tool dedicated to automated signal generation. This tool is
already useful for performing usual signal detection algorithms without terminological reasoning on
large datasets. The present implementation does
not take into account drug related issues such as
drug-drug interactions, complex ADR syndromes,
comparison of ADR proﬁles in drug groups.
We report the ﬁrst experience using terminological reasoning to improve performances of current
signal detection algorithms. Semantic integration
of terminological systems with data mining methods
is a promising technique. However, large computer
resources were needed in order to run the Racer
engine. It performed classiﬁcation of a knowledge
base comprising 530 formal descriptions of MedDRA
terms in the T-Box and 42,284 pharmacovigilance
case reports in the A-Box in more than 24 h on our
computer with 1.5 GB memory and 2 GHz processor.
We had difﬁculties managing NOS and NEC terms
in MedDRA and are searching some alternative solution to express their meanings in description logic.
The ADR ontology does not describe the whole MedDRA terminology and would not be large enough to
use in pharmacovigilance databases already coded
with MedDRA. It was sufﬁcient for our test database
after translation of WHO-ART to MedDRA terms.
In a previous study, we used a bibliographic score
to show that our tool can identify more known
drug-ADR associations than using Bayesian approach
alone [17]. Among associations generated by the
system, the ones, which are unknown are called
signals. Validation of signals is performed with
pharmaco-epidemiological studies that are outside

the scope of this study. We have demonstrated that
our system generates more associations (among
which known associations), however we still do not
know if the system highlights more relevant signals
or is generating more noise.
Grouping of cases using terminological reasoning and approximate matching within the ontology
helped us to identify more occurrences of drugADR associations than using the original MedDRA
hierarchy. Ontological reasoning and approximate
matching could help pharmacovigilance experts
to increase the number of responses to their
queries when investigating case reports coded with
MedDRA.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the French network of 31 pharmacovigilance regional centers that have collected,
analyzed and registered ADR case reports in the
French national database. Dr. Pascal Auriche performed the necessary extractions in the database
and helped us to manage the data.

References
[1] R.H.B. Meyboom, M. Lindquist, A.C.G. Egberts, I.R.
Edwards, Signal detection and follow-up in pharmacovigilance, Drug Saf. 25 (6) (2002) 459—465.
[2] A. Bate, M. Lindquist, I.R. Edwards, S. Olsson, R. Orre, A.
Lansner, R.M. De Freitas, A bayesian neural network method
for adverse drug reaction signal generation, Eur. J. Clin.
Pharmacol. 54 (1998) 315—321.
[3] A. Szarfman, S.G. Machado, R.T. O’Neill, Use of screening algorithms and computer systems to efﬁciently signal
higher-than-expected combinations of drugs and events in
the US FDA’s spontaneous reports database, Drug Saf. 25 (6)
(2002) 381—392.
[4] S.J. Evans, P.C. Waller, S. Davis, Use of proportional reporting ratios (PRRs) for signal generation from spontaneous
adverse drug reaction reports, Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug
Saf. 10 (6) (2001) 483—486.
[5] A.C. Egberts, R.H. Meyboom, E.P. van Puijenbroek, Use of
measures of disproportionality in pharmacovigilance: three
Dutch examples, Drug Saf. 25 (6) (2002) 453—458.
[6] M. Lindquist, M. Stahl, A. Bate, I.R. Edwards, R.H. Meyboom, A retrospective evaluation of a data mining approach
to aid ﬁnding new adverse drug reaction signals in the WHO
international database, Drug Saf. 23 (6) (2000) 533—542.
[7] E.P. van Puijenbroek, A. Bate, H.G. Leufkens, M. Lindquist,
M.R. Orre, A.C. Egberts, A comparison of measures of
disproportionality for signal detection in spontaneous
reporting systems for adverse drug reactions, Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 11 (1) (2002) 3—10.
[8] E.G. Brown, L. Wood, S. Wood, The medical dictionary
for regulatory activities (MedDRA), Drug Saf. 20 (2) (1999)
109—117.
[9] A. Rossi-Mori, F. Consorti, E. Galeazzi, Standards to
support development of terminological systems for

Implementation of automated signal generation in pharmacovigilance

[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

healthcare telematics, Methods Inform. Med. 37 (1998)
551—563.
J.J. Cimino, Desiderata for controlled medical vocabularies
in the twenty-ﬁrst century, Methods Inform. Med. 37 (1998)
394—403.
C. Bousquet, G. Lagier, A. Lillo-Le Louët, C. Le Beller,
A. Venot, M.-C. Jaulent, Appraisal of MedDRA conceptual
structure for describing and grouping adverse drug reactions, Drug Saf. 28 (1) (2005) 19—34.
E.G. Brown, Effects of coding dictionary on signal generation. A consideration of use of MedDRA compared with
WHO-ART, Drug Saf. 25 (6) (2002) 445—452.
M. Yokotsuka, M. Aoyama, K. Kubota, The use of a medical
dictionary for regulatory activities terminology (MedDRA)
in prescription-event monitoring in Japan (J-PEM), Int. J.
Med. Inform. 57 (2—3) (2000) 139—153.
Y.A. Lussier, D.J. Rothwell, R.A. Coté, The SNOMED model:
a knowledge source for the controlled terminology of the
computerized patient record, Methods Inform. Med. 37 (2)
(1998) 161—164.
S. Bechhofer, I. Horrocks, C. Goble, R. Stevens, OilEd: a
Reason-able Ontology Editor for the Semantic Web, in: Proceedings of KI2001, Joint German/Austrian Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, LNAI: Springer-Verlag, 2001.
I. Horrocks, U. Sattler, S. Tobies, Reasoning with Individuals
for the description logic SHIQ, in: Proceedings of the 17th

[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]

[21]
[22]

[23]

571

International Conference on Automated Deduction (CADE17), 2000, pp. 482—496.
C. Henegar, C. Bousquet, A. Lillo-Le Louët, P. Degoulet,
M.C. Jaulent, A knowledge-based approach for automated
signal generation, Medinfo 2004 (2004) 626—630.
A. Bate. The use of Bayesian conﬁdence propagation neural network in pharmacovigilance. Doctoral thesis, Umeå
University, 2003.
W. DuMouchel, Bayesian data mining in large frequency
tables, with an application to the FDA Spontaneous Reporting System, Am. Stat. 53 (1999) 177—202.
W. DuMouchel, D. Pregibon, Empirical Bayes screening for
multi-item associations, in: Proceedings of the 17th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, 2001, pp. 67—76.
D.M. Fram, J.S. Almenoff, W. DuMouchel, Empirical
Bayesian data mining for discovering patterns in postmarketing drug safety, SIGKDD’03, Washington, DC, 2003.
V. Haarslev, R. Möller, Description of the RACER system and
its applications, in: Proceedings of the International Workshop on Description Logics (DL-2001), Stanford, USA, vol.
1—3, 2001, pp. 132—142.
I. Horrocks, L. Padgham, L. Thomson, Feasibility of optimised disjunctive reasoning for approximate matching, in:
Proceedings of the 12th Australian Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI’99), Springer-Verlag, 1999.

