Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 17 (2019) 100190

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/imu

A novel method for drug-adverse event extraction using machine learning
Kajal Negi , Arun Pavuri, Ladle Patel, Chirag Jain

T

∗

Data Science and Insights, Genpact, Bangalore, India

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Keywords:
Pharmacovigilance
Text analytics
Natural language processing
Machine learning

Background: An extensive amount of data derived from medical case reports regarding potential adverse events
is subjected to manual review. Devising efficient strategies for identification and information extraction concerning potential adverse events are needed to support timely monitoring of the reports and decision making.
Methods: This paper aims at providing a machine learning (ML) and natural language processing (NLP) based
solution for extracting suspect drugs and adverse events. The solution is based upon two approaches: Causal
Sentence Classification classifies the relationship between drug and medical condition as causal or non-causal,
and Suspect Drug Identification classifies each drug present in the report as a suspect drug or non-suspect drug.
Results: Causal Sentence Classification yielded a precision of 0.85 and recall of 0.84 in establishing causality
between drugs and medical conditions on the testing dataset consisting of 6252 records. After evaluation on a
reliable testing dataset of 3522 records, the Suspect Drug Identification successfully identified suspect drugs with
a precision of 0.72 and recall of 0.77.
Conclusions: The developed solution relies on semantic and syntactic based features to capture the writing style
of incoming reports, and showcases the potential of ML and NLP for Pharmacovigilance.

1. Background
Pharmacovigilance, as defined by World Health Organization
(WHO), is the science and activities for detection, assessment, monitoring and prevention of adverse effects or any other drug related
problem. It is a very important aspect for measuring risks of a medicinal
product beyond clinical trials. An unintended symptom or disease associated with a medicinal product is termed an adverse event (AE). An
associated medicinal product may not be considered related to adverse
events, and is therefore a suspect drug. Also, the associated medicinal
product and adverse event are considered to have a causal relationship.
Identifying adverse events from incoming reports is useful to construct
a knowledge base that can be utilized for future identification of drugadverse event pairs using association rules mining [1]. The large scale
of publicly available biomedical dataset containing named entities and
concepts provides information for introducing automation in Pharmacovigilance [2]. The problem of finding new drug-adverse event signals
using aggregate numbers of reports is widely studied. Since it is easier
for a rule-based solution to lack robustness, presence of external features with high association along with stored data provides the robustness for the detection of adverse reactions [3]. Proportionality
analysis of reporting data contains valuable information for detecting

new drug adverse events [5]. An extension of this idea, the Bayesian
Confidence Propagation Neural Network (BCPNN) algorithm leveraging
disproportionality measure, takes a matrix of the drug-AE associations
as input and their frequency of occurrence in the source [6]. Improvement in signal detection makes use of stronger predictors (multiple strength of evidence) and trends in time and geographic spread
leveraging logistic regression [9]. Collective analysis of reports makes
use of dependency of association present in one report to that of another, and gives less attention to the strength of individual reports.
Gauging drug-AE on individual reports requires improving understanding of the details of reports. Using a well-defined term for adverse
event from Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) at the granular level
helps to improve detection of drug-AE association [7]. Though explored
only for the case of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism,
statistical NLP has shown potential in extracting drug-AE pairs from
narrative reports [8]. Machine learning classifiers are explored for
consumer product reviews in Ref. [10] for health-related information.
To establish causal relationships between drug and adverse event [11],
provides an experiment using the scalable machine learning based
system, Java Simple Relation Extraction (JSRE), for extracting the relationship between drug and adverse event mentioned in scientific case
reports. Recent advancement in text classification tasks suggests using a

Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: kajal.negi@genpact.com (K. Negi), arun.pavuri@genpact.com (A. Pavuri), ladle.patel@genpact.com (L. Patel),
chirag.jain4@genpact.com (C. Jain).
∗

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imu.2019.100190
Received 9 May 2019; Accepted 10 May 2019
Available online 11 May 2019
2352-9148/ © 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 17 (2019) 100190

K. Negi, et al.

Recurrent Convolution Neural Network for capturing contextual information and text constructs [12]. Techniques like Conditional
Random Field (CRFs) are found suitable for extraction for Pharmacovigilance for social media [13]. This paper explains novel approach
for extracting suspect drugs and adverse events from medical reports.
The first method tries to establish a causal relationship between the
drug and the medical condition. In case of identification of causality, it
classifies the drug as suspect drug. At the same time, the medical
conditions having a causal relationship with the suspect drug are
classified as an adverse event. The second method classifies a drug into
a suspect drug or a non-suspect drug using NLP features and machine
learning for classification.
The next sections describe the methodology developed to identify
the suspect drug and adverse event along with the experimental results.

Table 1
Example for Feature set of Causal Sentence Classification.
N gram

Drug Token

Medical Condition Token

1g

boy_prior_drug
who_prior_drug
took_prior_drug
is_post_drug
now_post_drug
suffering_ post_drug
boy_who_prior_drug
who_took_prior_drug
is_now_post_drug
now_suffering_post_drug

now_prior_medc
suffering_prior_medc
with_prior_medc
as_post_medc
reported_post_medc
by_ post_medc
now_suffering_prior_medc
suffering_with_prior_medc
as_reported_post_medc
reported_by_post_medc

2g

The relationship between the drug and the medical condition can be
classified to have a causal relationship if the medical condition is an
adverse event of the drug. The developed strategy leverages this aspect
to extract a suspect drug and the associated adverse event by identifying a causal relationship from the structure of the sentence using
Machine Learning.

reported by hospital authorities.
For the above example, ‘paracetamol’ is the drug pivot and ‘headache’ is the medical condition pivot. ‘boy’, ‘who’ and ‘took’ are the three
tokens appearing before the drug pivot. ‘is’, ‘now’ and ‘suffering’ are the
three tokens appearing after the drug pivot. Similarly, ‘now’, ‘suffering’
and ‘with’ are the three tokens appearing before the medical condition
pivot. ‘as’, ‘reported’ and ‘by’ are three tokens appearing after the
medical condition pivot.‘boy_prior_drug’, ‘who_prior_drug’ and ‘took_prior_drug’ are three 1- gram features coming before the drug pivot,
‘paracetamol’ and ‘is_post_drug’, ‘now_post_drug’ and ‘suffering_post_drug’
are three 1-g features coming after the drug pivot. Similarly, ‘now_prior_medc’, ‘suffering_prior_medc’ and ‘with_prior_ medc’ are three 1-g
features before the medical condition pivot, ‘headache’ and ‘as_post_medc’, ‘reported_post_medc’, ‘by_post_medc’ are the three 1-g features after
the medical condition pivot. The implemented version extends the
above example to higher n-grams. Table 1 explains 1-g and 2-g level
feature sets created for the above example using three tokens on both
sides of the drug and the medical condition for the sentence. For the
dataset and analysis presented in the paper, three tokens around the
drug and medical condition pivot are taken. The number of tokens
around the drug and medical condition is iterated upon. The chosen
number of tokens is considered to balance the trade-off between the
overfitting and bias scenario. The features generated become part of the
vocabulary for machine learning algorithms.

2.2. Data Collation

2.4. Suspect Drug Identification

The corpus consists of two kinds of sentences, one which showed
causality and the other which did not show causality [14]. The corresponding drug name and medical condition name is also available in
the same corpus. The corpus is manually annotated for drug and
medical condition names. The available dataset of 20838 records was
divided into 70% and 30% for training and testing, respectively.

This section describes the methodology used to classify a drug as a
suspect drug or non-suspect drug by using a machine learning based
classification approach after representing semantic and syntactic relationships in form of features.

2. Methods
The section details the parallel steps of Causal Sentence
Classification and Suspect Drug Identification. Causal Sentence
Classification tries to identify the relationship between drug and adverse event, and indicates if the adverse event is associated with the
drug. Suspect Drug Identification tries to differentiate between all of the
drugs present in the report, and separates suspect drug from non-suspect drugs mentioned in the report. Furthermore, Data Collation and
Feature Set subsections cover the details. For the two methods, the
dataset was divided into 70% and 30% for training and testing, respectively. A similar modeling and validation scheme is used in both the
approaches detailed in the Machine Learning Ensemble Framework
section and Method Validation section of the paper.
2.1. Causal Sentence Classification

2.5. Data Collation

2.3. Feature set

A data-set of around 10000 cases, comprising of abstracts from
PubMed was created [15]. Precisely the following query was performed
for the Abstracts collection:
“adverse effects”[sh] AND (hasabstract[text] AND Case Reports
[ptyp]) AND “drug therapy”[sh] AND English[lang] AND (Case Reports
[ptyp])
There were approximately 11739 drugs that were present in this
data-set. All of the drugs were manually tagged to be a suspect drug or
non-suspect drug after careful study of the content. It was found that
37% of the drugs were suspect drugs. Furthermore, the labelled drug
data-set was divided into 70% and 30% for training and testing, respectively.

Causal Sentence Classification identifies phrases that represent
causality in the text. For each sentence containing drug(s) and medical
condition(s), features are created corresponding to each drug and the
medical condition pair in the sentence. Drug and the medical condition
are taken as pivots, and information is extracted around them capturing
the structure of the sentence. Each space and punctuation separated
word and the punctuations are considered as a token. ‘k’ tokens before
and after each pivot are used and n-grams from them are formed for
creating features. Information of tokens with respect to their position
(prior or post) around a pivot, and the kind of pivot (drug or medical
condition), is retained while creating features. An n-gram of tokens is
combined with their position token (‘prior’ or ‘post’) and the pivot type
token (‘drug’ or ‘medc’). Feature creation for the below example is explained using three tokens on both sides of the drug and the medical
condition for the sentence.
The boy who took paracetamol is now suffering with headache as

2.6. Feature set
For each extracted report, features corresponding to each drug
present in the report were created. Each drug was labelled as a suspect
2

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 17 (2019) 100190

K. Negi, et al.

Table 2
Feature Set of Suspect drug classification.
Feature No.

Feature Name

Feature Description

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

count
first_drug_flag
last_drug
stop_context
stop_flag_in_sentence
only_drug_in_content
adverse_context
adverse_event
induce_context
induce_flag_in_sentence
spread

Count of the drug in the report
If the drug is the first mentioned drug in the report or not
If the drug is the last mentioned drug in the report or not
If the synonyms of “discontinue” are verbs where the drug is subject or object
If the synonyms of “discontinue” are present in same sentence as drug
If it is the only drug in the report
If the synonyms of “adverse” are verbs where the drug is subject or object
If the synonyms of “adverse” are present in same sentence as drug
If the synonyms of “induce” are verbs where the drug is the subject or object
If the synonyms of “induce” is present in same sentence as drug
count of the drug by the total number of sentences in the report

drug or non-suspect drug after a thoughtful manual analysis of the report. Using this dataset, the features were generated after analyzing
reporting patterns for identifying a suspect drugs case content. A total
of 11 features were drafted to capture all of the potential pointers
(Table 2). These features included frequency and location of drugs
along with contextual understanding from words in the vicinity that
hinted towards a possible adverse event caused by the drug. Subject,
verb and object triad were extracted using POS tag parsing for creating
contextual features (Feature No. 4, 7, 9). Noun phrases coming before
verb phrases constituted the subject of the sentence, while noun phrases
coming after verb phrases comprised the object of the sentence. Feature
No. 1 is discrete. Feature No.'s 2–10 are binary, while Feature No. 11 is
continuous.

Table 3
Confusion matrix of ensemble model for Causal Sentence Classification.
Predicted

Actual

0
1

0

1

3598
374

331
1949

4.1. Causal Sentence Classification
The testing of Causal Sentence Classification was performed on
6252 records out of total 20838 records. 6252 records comprise 30% of
the dataset which were not used for training. Features were created as
described in the Causal Sentence Classification in the Methods section.
Table 3 captures the confusion matrix, showcasing the counts of the
predictions on the testing dataset. The performance metrics for ANN,
RF, LG and ensemble of these three classifiers are given in Table 4. The
ML ensemble model of Causal Sentence Classification was able to
classify 84% of the actual causal relationship between drug and medical
condition in the test dataset as causal. The results also showcases that
85% of the predictions of the ML ensemble model for causality between
drug and medical condition are correctly classified in the test dataset.

3. Machine Learning Ensemble Framework
This section describes the ML structure used in both Causal Sentence
Classification and Suspect Drug Identification. Stacked generalization
[16] was used as the ensemble method to reduce the generalization
error. The structure has two levels of stacking. This is achieved by using
a pool of base classifiers followed by another classifier to combine their
predictions. Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Logistic Regression (LG)
and Random Forest (RF) were the three base classifiers used for the
ensemble framework. Training of these individual classifiers followed a
standard 5-fold cross validation method. Logistic regression was then
used as the Level 1 classifier to combine the output of the three base
(Level 0) classifiers, as shown in Fig. 1.

4.2. Suspect Drug Identification
For testing Suspect Drug Identification, 3522 records were used
from the dataset. These comprise 30% of the dataset which was not
used for training. The confusion metric shown in Table 5 depicts that
the ML ensemble model successfully captured 77% of the suspect drugs
in the test dataset. At the same time, 72% of the predictions of the
ensemble model for suspect drug are correctly classified. Table 6 gives
precision, recall, specificity and accuracy numbers of ANN, RF, LG and
ensemble of these three classifiers.

4. Method Validation
The section presents results and metrics supporting the validity of
the two approaches given in the Methods section. The evaluation of the
Causal Sentence Classification and Suspect Drug Identification was
performed on 30% of the respective dataset which was not used for
training. The dataset used for validation in the Causal Sentence
Classification and Suspect Drug Identification is a manually annotated
dataset, making it reliable for testing. Fig. 1 describes the prediction
phase followed by the two developed strategies.

5. Discussion
The paper focuses on a very critical aspect of Pharmacovigilance.
The solution includes an analytical approach to classify the association
relationship between drug and medical condition and also to distinguish a suspect drug from the other drugs present in the report. The
Table 4
Evaluation of causal sentence classification.

Fig. 1. Stacking: Training and Testing ML Pipeline: Artificial Neural Network,
Logistic Regression and Random Forest at Level 0. Logistic Regression is used at
Level 1 for Ensemble.
3

Algorithm

Precision

Recall

Specificity

Accuracy

ANN
RF
LG
ML Ensemble

0.85
0.80
0.85
0.85

0.81
0.82
0.84
0.84

0.91
0.88
0.91
0.92

0.87
0.86
0.89
0.89

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 17 (2019) 100190

K. Negi, et al.

Table 5
Confusion matrix of ensemble model for Suspect Drug Identification.
Predicted

Actual

0
1

0

1

1737
321

417
1047

Table 6
Evaluation of suspect drug identification.
Algorithm

Precision

Recall

Specificity

Accuracy

ANN
RF
LG
ML Ensemble

0.72
0.69
0.72
0.72

0.77
0.78
0.76
0.77

0.81
0.78
0.81
0.81

0.79
0.78
0.79
0.79

Fig. 3. Precision–Recall Plot for Suspect Drug Identification: a) ANN, b)
Random Forest, c) Logistic Regression and d) Ensemble Modeling.

Case 1 from Ref. [18] which can be accessed at PMID: 26176228 (Example 1) and PMID: 26613233 (Example 2) respectively. Causal Sentence Classification tends to relate adverse events to drugs when the
words around drug and medical condition indicate causality. Causal
Sentence Classification considers all of the drug and medical conditions
pairs present in a sentence. The Suspect Drug Identification relies more
on NLP and contextual features. The Suspect Drug Identification considers all of the drugs present in the report.
In Example 1, Vincristine is the suspected medicinal product associated with Neuropathy, Ptosis and Ophthalmoplegia. Table 7 shows
the probability given by the Causal Sentence Classification for a drug
and medical condition pair to have a causal relationship. According to
Causal Sentence Classification, Vincristine and Neuropathy have a
causal relationship making Vincristine a suspect drug for causing an
adverse event, Neuropathy with a probability of 0.86. Table 8 gives the
result of Suspect Drug Identification for Example 1. Suspect Drug
Identification successfully classifies Vincristine as a suspect drug with a
probability of 0.54.
In Example 2, Sertraline is found to be inducing Torticollis. The
results of Causal Sentence Classification suggest that Sertraline and
Torticollis are causally related with a probability of 0.76 (Table 9). The
results of the Suspect Drug Identification for Example 2 are given in
Table 10, which shows Sertraline as a suspect drug with probability
0.43.
Using the PMID given in Ref. [14], a dataset containing Abstracts is
created using [15]. Drug names and their association with the medical
condition provided in Ref. [14] are used for determining a drug as a
suspect drug or non-suspect drug. Hence, the dataset retains the distinguishing and informative nature of [14]. After removing duplicate
entries of drug and harmonization of the dataset, it consists of 1767
records, out of which 1161 records are labelled as suspect drug. This
dataset is tested on the earlier trained Suspect Drug Identification ML
ensemble model mentioned in the paper as an experiment. The confusion matrix of the results of the Suspect Drug Identification is given in
Table 11. The Suspect Drug Identification successfully classified 70% of

Fig. 2. Precision–Recall Plot for Causal Sentence Classification: a) ANN, b)
Random Forest, c) Logistic Regression d) Ensemble.

methodology makes use of machine learning techniques to extract
suspect drug and associated adverse events. The novelty of the proposed two approaches lies in capturing the writing style of various reporters using carefully crafted semantic and syntactic features. These
features focus on extracting contextual information by understanding
the structure of the reporting documents. The designed solution is independent of any specific drug and medical condition. The features are
further used to train robust ML models for real-time predictions of any
new content input to the system. Causal Sentence Classification collects
information around the drugs and medical condition while Suspect
Drug Identification extracts information of each drug in a report. The
collected information is input to the ANN, RF and LG classifiers for
predictions. The ensemble approach in ML framework leverages the
best of multiple algorithms to enhance the performance of the solution.
Individual precision and recall of each algorithm for Causal Sentence
Classification and Suspect Drug Identification are given in Tables 4 and
6 respectively. Logistic regression collates the result from the three
classifiers explained in the Machine Learning Ensemble Framework
section. The precision and recall curve for Causal Sentence Classification and Suspect Drug Identification are drawn against the thresholds in
Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, respectively. A higher recall or sensitivity of classifiers
ensures not missing any potential adverse event and corresponding
potential suspect drug present in a report. A suitably high precision
makes the classifier's prediction of the adverse event and suspect drug
reliable. A similar scheme is used while choosing the threshold for
Causal Sentence Classification and Suspect Drug Identification.
Results of extraction performed using the developed
Pharmacovigilance methods for two example case reports are discussed
below. These example case reports are Abstracts from Ref. [17] and

Table 7
Extraction of causal sentence classification for example 1 (PMID: 26176228).

4

Drugs in Report

Medical Condition

Causal Probability

Classification

Vincristine
Vincristine
Vincristine
Vincristine
Vincristine
Vincristine

Leukemia
Solid Tumors
Lymphomas
Ptosis
Ophthalmoplegia
Neuropathy

0.11
0.06
0.23
0.20
0.29
0.86

0
0
0
0
0
1

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 17 (2019) 100190

K. Negi, et al.

Table 8
Extraction of suspect drug identification for example 1 (PMID: 26176228).

Table 14
Extraction of suspect drug identification for example case report 2.

Drugs in Report

Suspect Drug Probability

Classification

Drugs in Report

Probability

Classification

Vincristine
Pyridoxine
Pyridostigmine

0.54
0.17
0.17

1
0
0

Bimatoprost
Prostanoid

0.78
0.28

1
0

than past known historical cause-effect relationships. Hence, the developed method should also be able to identify new drug-AE as well.

Table 9
Extraction of causal sentence classification for example 2 (case 1 in PMID:
26613233).
Drugs in Report

Medical Condition

Causal Probability

Classification

Sertraline

Torticollis

0.76

1

Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
The dataset used in the paper are reports regarding adverse events
which are communicated to the pharma companies in forms of research
articles. The study does not involve any sort of medical tests being
performed on humans and animals. There is no special mention to any
individual. No animal data is used in the study.

Table 10
Extraction of suspect drug identification for example 2 (case 1 in PMID:
26613233).
Drugs in Report

Suspect Drug Probability

Classification

Sertraline
Biperiden

0.43
0.10

1
0

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Table 11
Confusion matrix of ensemble model for Suspect Drug Identification.

Availability of data and materials
The data that support the findings of this study are available online
and are cited appropriately. The case reports used in this paper are from
PubMed Central.

Predicted

Actual

0
1

0

1

318
352

288
809

Authors' contributions
KN and LP designed the solution and led the feature generation from
the data for modeling. AP designed the models and the computational
framework to analyze the data. KN, AP, LP and CJ wrote the manuscript
while collating their respective contributions for the research. CJ conceived the study and was in charge of overall direction and thought
leadership for the solution.

Table 12
Evaluation of suspect drug identification.
Algorithm

Precision

Recall

Specificity

Accuracy

ML Ensemble

0.74

0.70

0.52

0.64

Ethical statement

the actual suspect drugs. Table 12 shows the performance metric of the
Suspect Drug Identification on 1767 Abstract records.
Results of extractions performed using the Suspect Drug
Identification for two challenging example case reports are discussed
below. These example case reports are taken from Ref. [19], which can
be accessed at PMCID: PMC3853673 PMID: 24347986. The Suspect
Drug Identification relies more on NLP and contextual features. The
results of Suspect Drug Identification for the two-example case reports
are shown in Table 13 and Table 14.

The authors whose names are listed below work in Data Science and
Insights team of Genpact and leverage Machine Learning and Natural
Language Processing to come up with intelligent automated systems
which can be used by industry in optimizing their end to end processes.
At the same time, the authors are driven from the urge to develop a
system which has direct impact on saving human lives. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. This work is completely
funded by Genpact. The authors are employees of Genpact's Data
Science and Insights Team. Genpact sponsored & provided domain expertise for Pharmacovigilance, manual annotation of the data and the
required infrastructure for developing the solution, etc.

6. Conclusion
Automation aids the problem of Pharmacovigilance of timely processing of reports. The developed methods provide extraction of adverse event and suspect drug using ML and NLP, with promising results.
It is important to note that the developed solution relies more on
contextual linkage between the drugs and medical conditions rather

Conflicts of interest statement
The authors whose names are listed below work in Data Science and
Insights team of Genpact and leverage Machine Learning and Natural
Language Processing to come up with intelligent automated systems
which can be used by industry in optimizing their end to end processes.
At the same time, the authors are driven from the urge to develop a
system which has direct impact on saving human lives. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. This work is completely
funded by Genpact. The authors are employees of Genpact's Data
Science and Insights Team. Genpact sponsored & provided domain expertise for Pharmacovigilance, manual annotation of the data and the

Table 13
Extraction of suspect drug identification for example case report 1.
Drugs in Report

Probability

Classification

Tizanidine
Ciprofloxacin
Risedronate

0.53
0.08
0.62

1
0
1

5

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 17 (2019) 100190

K. Negi, et al.

required infrastructure for developing the solution, etc.

References

Acknowledgements

[1] Séverac, et al. Non-redundant association rules between diseases and medications:
an automated method for knowledge base construction. BMC Med Inf Decis Mak
2015;15:29.
[2] Maitra A, Annervaz KM, Jain TG, et al. A novel text analysis platform for pharmacovigilance of clinical drugs. Procedia Comput Sci 2014;36:322–32.
[3] Bate A, Lindquist M, Edwards IR, Olsson S, Orre R, Lansner A, et al. A Bayesian
neural network method for adverse drug reaction signal generation. Eur J Clin
Pharmacol 1998;54(4):315–21.
[5] Evans SJW, Waller PC, Davis S. Use of proportional reporting ratios (PRRs) for
signal generation from spontaneous adverse drug reaction reports.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2001;10(6):483–6.
[6] Yeleswarapu S, Rao A, Joseph T, et al. A pipeline to extract drug-adverse event pairs
from multiple data sources. BMC Med Inf Decis Mak 2014;14:13.
[7] Winnenburg R, Shah NH. Generalized enrichment analysis improves the detection
of adverse drug events from the biomedical literature. BMC Bioinf 2016;17:250.
[8] Rochefort CM, Verma AD, Eguale T, Lee TC, Buckeridge DL. A novel method of
adverse event detection can accurately identify venous thromboembolisms (VTEs)
from narrative electronic health record data. J Am Med Inform Assoc Jan
2015;22(1):155–65.
[9] Caster O, et al. Improved statistical signal detection in pharmacovigilance by
combining multiple strength-of-evidence aspects in vigiRank. Drug Saf
2014;37:617–28.
[10] Torii M, Tilak SS, Doan S, Zisook DS, Fan JW. Mining health-related issues in
consumer product reviews by using scalable text analytics. Biomed Inf Insights
2016;8(Suppl 1):1–11.
[11] Gurulingappa H, Rajput AM, Toldo L. Extraction of potential adverse drug events
from medical case reports. J Biomed Semant 2012;3:15.
[12] Lai S, Xu L, Liu K, Zhao J. Recurrent convolutional neural networks for text classification. Proceedings of the twenty-ninth AAAI conference on artificial intelligence. 2015.
[13] Nikfarjam A, Sarker A, O'Connor K, Ginn R, Gonzalez G. Pharmacovigilance from
social media: mining adverse drug reaction mentions using sequence labeling with
word embedding cluster features. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2015;22(3):671–81.
[14] Gurulingappa H, Rajput AM, Roberts A, Fluck J, Apitius MH, Toldo L. Development
of a benchmark corpus to support the identification of adverse drug effects from
case reports. J Biomed Inform 2012;45(5):885–92. In Press.
[15] Fantini D. easyPubMed: search and retrieve scientific publication records from
PubMed. 2018.
[16] Wolpert DH. Stacked generalization. Neural Network 1992;5(2):241–60.
[17] Palkar AH, et al. Vincristine-induced Neuropathy presenting as Ptosis and ophthalmoplegia in a 2-year old boy. J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus 2015;52:e34–7.
[18] Ayaydin H, Bozkurt H. Spasmodic torticollis associated with sertraline in a child
and an adolescent. Turk J Pediatr 2015;57:109–11.
[19] Palleria C, et al. Limitations and obstacles of the spontaneous adverse drugs reactions reporting: two “challenging” case reports. J Pharmacol Pharmacother 2013
Dec. 4(Suppl1):S66–72.

This work is completely funded by Genpact. The authors are employees of Genpact's Data Science Team. Genpact sponsored & provided
domain expertise for Pharmacovigilance, manual annotation of the data
and the required infrastructure for developing the solution, etc. The
authors sincerely thank Eric Sandor, Dr. Armen Kherlopian and
Sreekanth Menon for the continuous support and guidance during the
project development.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.imu.2019.100190.
Abbreviations
AE
AI
ANN
API
BCPNN
CRF(s)
FDA
ICSR
JSRE
LG
MedDRA
MeSH
ML
NLP
OCR
PMC
POS
RCNN
RF
SVM(s)
WHO

Adverse Event
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Neural Network
Application Programming Interface
Bayesian Confidence Propagation Neural Network
Conditional Random Fields
Food and Drug Administration
Individual Case Safety Report
Java Simple Relation Extraction
Logistic Regression
Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
Medical Subject Headings
Machine Learning
Natural Language Processing
Optical Character Recognition
PubMed Central
Parts Of Speech
Recursive Convolution Neural Network
Random Forest
Support Vector Machines
World Health Organization

6

