Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Biomedical Informatics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yjbin

Mining association patterns of drug-interactions using post marketing
FDA’s spontaneous reporting data
Heba Ibrahim a,⇑, Amr Saad b,c, Amany Abdo a, A. Sharaf Eldin a
a

BioMedical Informatics Specialty, Department of Information Systems, Faculty of Computers and Information, Helwan University, Egypt
Egyptian Pharmaceutical Vigilance Center (EPVC), Egyptian Drug Authority, Egypt
c
National Organization for Drug Control and Research (NODCAR), Egypt
b

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 24 June 2015
Revised 7 February 2016
Accepted 15 February 2016
Available online 20 February 2016
Keywords:
Pharmacovigilance
Association rule mining
Proportional reporting ratio
Drug–drug interaction
RxNorm
Logistic regression

a b s t r a c t
Background and objectives: Pharmacovigilance (PhV) is an important clinical activity with strong implications for population health and clinical research. The main goal of PhV is the timely detection of adverse
drug events (ADEs) that are novel in their clinical nature, severity and/or frequency. Drug interactions
(DI) pose an important problem in the development of new drugs and post marketing PhV that contribute
to 6–30% of all unexpected ADEs. Therefore, the early detection of DI is vital. Spontaneous reporting systems (SRS) have served as the core data collection system for post marketing PhV since the 1960s. The
main objective of our study was to particularly identify signals of DI from SRS. In addition, we are presenting an optimized tailored mining algorithm called ‘‘hybrid Apriori”.
Methods: The proposed algorithm is based on an optimized and modified association rule mining (ARM)
approach. A hybrid Apriori algorithm has been applied to the SRS of the United States Food and Drug
Administration’s (U.S. FDA) adverse events reporting system (FAERS) in order to extract significant association patterns of drug interaction-adverse event (DIAE). We have assessed the resulting DIAEs qualitatively and quantitatively using two different triage features: a three-element taxonomy and three
performance metrics. These features were applied on two random samples of 100 interacting and 100
non-interacting DIAE patterns. Additionally, we have employed logistic regression (LR) statistic method
to quantify the magnitude and direction of interactions in order to test for confounding by co-medication
in unknown interacting DIAE patterns.
Results: Hybrid Apriori extracted 2933 interacting DIAE patterns (including 1256 serious ones) and 530
non-interacting DIAE patterns. Referring to the current knowledge using four different reliable resources
of DI, the results showed that the proposed method can extract signals of serious interacting DIAEs.
Various association patterns could be identified based on the relationships among the elements which
composed a pattern. The average performance of the method showed 85% precision, 80% negative predictive value, 81% sensitivity and 84% specificity. The LR modeling could provide the statistical context to
guard against spurious DIAEs.
Conclusions: The proposed method could efficiently detect DIAE signals from SRS data as well as, identifying rare adverse drug reactions (ADRs).
Ó 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Pharmacovigilance (PhV) has been defined by the World Health
Organization (WHO) as ‘‘the science and activities relating to the
detection, assessment, understanding and prevention of drugrelated problems” [1]. It is also known as drug safety surveillance.
PhV can be divided into two stages:

⇑ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: pharma_heba@hotmail.com (H. Ibrahim).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2016.02.009
1532-0464/Ó 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

(1) Premarketing surveillance: The information regarding adverse
drug reactions (ADRs) is collected from pre-clinical screening and phases I to III clinical trials [2];
(2) Post marketing surveillance: The data is accumulated during
the postapproval stage and throughout a drug’s market life.
A drug interaction adverse event (DIAE) is an adverse drug
effect (ADE/AE) caused by specific combinations of drugs, when
the pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic properties of one drug
in the combination are altered by another [3]. When two or more
drugs are administered simultaneously, this may result in

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

significant DIAEs which can alter drug effectiveness or even harm
the patient [4]. Moreover, the co-administration may alter significantly the safety and efficacy profile of a drug. As the number of
approved drugs increases, the number of potential DIAEs between
prescribed drugs rise rapidly [5]. Drug–drug interactions (DIs) are a
major cause of morbidity worldwide and a leading source of treatment inefficacy. They may account for up to 30% of unexpected
adverse drug events [6]. However, premarketing randomized clinical trials (RCTs) focus on establishing the safety and efficacy of single drugs and don’t typically investigate DIs [7]. In RCTs, patients
with multiple drug profiles are usually excluded. Even when a DI
is suspected, sample sizes and cohort biases limit the ability to discover rare ADEs [8]. With that said, DIAE signals can be identified
only through post marketing PhV [9]. A signal is defined as a possible causal relation between an AE and a drug [10]. Depending on
the seriousness of the DI, different regulatory actions may be
undertaken ranging from putting warnings on drug labels, to the
withdrawal of drugs from the market. Hence, it is necessary for
the drug regularity authorities (DRA) and marketing authorization
holder (MAH) of a drug to collect, analyze and interpret data relevant to patient safety, especially after the drug is launched into the
market.
As an example, mibefradil, a calcium channel blocker approved
by the FDA [11] in June 1997, was shortly withdrawn from the
market due to dangerous and even fatal interactions with at least
25 other drugs, including common antibiotics, antihistamines
and cancer drugs which resulted in prolonging the QT interval
[12]. In recognition of the challenge of post marketing surveillance
of interaction profiles between different drugs and its involvement
in patient safety, research into application of data mining
approaches for DIs discovery and prediction have been adopted
recently.
Another example, succinylcholine, a muscular relaxant used
during anaesthesia caused the death of an Egyptian patient due
to malignant hyperthermia (MH) resulting from concomitant
administration with inhaled Halothane for maintenance of anaesthesia before and during surgery. The Egyptian Pharmaceutical
Vigilance Center (EPVC) has reviewed the summary of product
characteristics (SmPC) of succinylcholine and warnings relating
its use from reliable sources. Hence, two levels of recommendations have been provided to healthcare professionals (HCP): How
to avoid MH in high risk patients and how to manage if it occurs
[13].
Spontaneous reporting systems (SRSs) have served as the core
data collection system for post marketing PhV since the 1960s.
They are passive systems composed of reports of suspected ADEs
collected spontaneously from healthcare professionals, consumers
and pharmaceutical companies and are maintained largely by regulatory health agencies [14]. Among the prominent SRSs is the United States Food and Drug Administration’s (US FDA) adverse events
reporting System (FAERS) [15]. The FAERS is a computerized information database designed to support the FDA’s post marketing
safety surveillance program for all approved drugs and therapeutic
biologic products. It is a relational database structured in adherence with the international safety reporting guidance that has been
issued by the international conference on Harmonization (ICH E2B)
[16]. The FDA issues FAERS data to the public and grouped it in
quarterly file packages since 2004 to the present time [15]. It
receives approximately between 300,000 and 500,000 new safety
reports per year. Previous studies have reported that unexpected
ADEs result in more than 770,000 injuries (hospital admissions,
ICU visits, etc.) and deaths each year [17] and approximately 50%
of those ADEs are due to DIs [18]. Thus, despite the underreporting of DIs in FAERS, it was postulated that many of the
reported ADEs are probably due to DIs and not due to the single
suspected drug that was reported. In this study, our main hypoth-

295

esis was that mining FAERS, as a source of SRS data using our proposed hybrid Apriori algorithm, could be used to efficiently
identify known DIAEs and probably detect novel DIAE signals as
well. Hybrid Apriori is based on adopting the disproportionality
measure called proportional reporting ratio (PRR) with association
rules mining (ARM) as a measure of worthiness instead of the confidence measure used in classic Apriori (discussed later in
Section 3).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
provides a review of relevant studies with the aim of identifying
the trends of research in DI surveillance and recognizing a research
gap that motivates our work; Section 3 presents the proposed
methodology and resources used; Section 4 describes and discusses the experiment results; and Section 5 concludes the study,
in addition to identifying limitations and future perspectives.

2. Literature review
In recent years, there are an increasing number of studies that
have been dedicated to mining of DIs. We have developed a brief
literature review in terms of data source, research focus, data mining techniques and evaluation.
Van Puijenbroek et al. applied logistic regression (LR) modeling
for detecting potential DIs from spontaneous reports received by
Netherlands PhV foundation Lareb in two studies [19,20]. The
results of the first study showed the potential association between
the delay of withdrawal bleeding during concomitant use of oral
contraceptives and antifungal itraconazole. In the second study,
the authors proved a statistical interaction between the use of
diuretics and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) suggesting a decrease in the efficacy of diuretics resulting in worsening of congestive heart failure (CHF) associated with
coadministration of these two drugs. Norén et al. [9] used a disproportionality measure ‘‘X Shrinkage measure” to calculate an
observed-to-expected ratio as a disproportionality measure to
screen reporting patterns strongly suggestive of potential DIs in
SRS database of WHO.
Thakrar et al. [21] performed a retrospective study on spontaneous reports from FAERS to compare their multiplicative and
additive models using known interactions of drugs. The multiplicative model assumed that the risk associated with a drug multiplies
with the background risk, while the additive model assumed that
the risk associated with a drug adds to the background risk.
According to the multiplicative model, and under the assumption
that the null hypothesis is true (i.e., no interaction), the proportion
of an event associated with the drug combination is the same as
the product of the proportional risks of individual drugs in the
absence of the other (PRRAB ¼ PRRA  PRRB ). Similarly for the additive model, there is no interaction when the proportion of an event
associated with the drug combination is the same as the addition
of proportional risks of individual drugs (PRRAB ¼ PRRA þ PRRB ). A
DI signal generated when PRRAB =PRRA  PRRB > 1 and PRRAB 
PRRA  PRRB > 0 for multiplicative and additive models respectively. Both models were fitted to four known interactions and to
four known non-DDI. Their results showed that the additive model
has better sensitivity in detecting DI signals and that the multiplicative model may further help qualify the strength of the signal
detected by the additive model.
Harpaz et al. [22] applied an optimized and tailored implementation of the Apriori algorithm to mine a sample of AERS reports
(full set of the year 2008) with at least two drugs and one AE using
an association rule for the purpose of detecting drug interaction
adverse effects (DIAEs). Due to the inappropriateness of the standard Apriori scores for PhV applications, the authors used the
RRR score instead, with the additional constraint that each rule

296

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

must have an RRR larger than any of its subsets. The latter constraint was used to exclude spurious associations [22]. The authors
showed that 35% of the DIAE rules corresponded to known associations, thereby demonstrating the potential value of their tailored Apriori algorithm for identifying statistically significant
DDIs in SRSs for further investigation.
In a recent study, Tatonetti et al. [23] proposed a classification
model to predict novel DDIs by linking information from multiple
sources; FAERS and clinical data of electronic medical records from
Stanford hospital. The authors first built profiles for 8 clinically
severe adverse event (SAE) classes, and then they constructed a
predictive model by dividing FAERS data into two independent
sets: reports that listed exactly one drug and reports that listed
exactly two drugs. The authors used the first for training SAE
classes computationally and the second for validation. By performing a feature selection and fitting a logistic regression model, the
authors identified 171 DDIs. The predictive performance of the
model was validated by a hospital’s EMR through which the positive association of paroxetine and pravastatin with increased blood
glucose (22.6 mg/dl) was predicted.
A recent relevant paper by Iyer et al. [24] presented a text mining approach for identifying DI signals directly from the textual
portions within two large corpora of electronic health records
(EHR). The authors used a lexicon of approximately 5.6 million
terms derived from the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS)
and BioPortal to create a concept timeline for each patient by exact
string matching on the textual notes, negation detection and family history detection. They applied adjusted disproportionality
ratios to identify significant DIAE associations among 1165 drugs
and 14 AEs. The results showed that DIs signaled from EHRs have
the same performance of those signaled from SRSs.
Other work in this area has focused on a significantly different
data source depending on patient social media [25]. Based on the
results of studies conducted by Yang et al. [26,27] which proved
that social media & patients’ forums can be great resources for
detecting signals of single drug-ADR. Another study has been conducted by the same authors for extracting DIs from this data
source. The authors adopted lexicon-based approach in which they
used association rule mining (ARM) to detect DI signals from MedHelp as one of the online healthcare communities [28]. The authors
constrained the number of interactive drugs as two and considered
the co-occurrence of the pair of drugs with their ADR in the same
posts or comments as an association. The authors investigated the
interestingness and impressiveness of the extracted DI signals by
four measures {support, confidence, leverage, lift and interaction
ratio} [28]. The resulting associations showed that the proposed
method could effectively detect DDIs reported by DrugBank.
Although those studies, based on patient social media, showed
that data mining approaches could generate earlier drug safety signals than spontaneous reporting data, this type of data source has
many hurdles. These challenges can be summarized as follows:
extracting and interpreting colloquial language, correcting grammatical and spelling errors, identifying speech act of each drug side
effect and identifying instances of patient drug termination and the
motivation behind termination.
In our study, we focused on the interaction between two drugs
to detect DIAE association patterns through an optimized hybrid
Apriori algorithm using FAERS as a source of one of the largest publically available SRS data. Our association task is very similar to the
recent work performed by Harpaz et al. [22]. As previously
described, the authors aimed to employ ARM on spontaneous
reporting data of U.S. FDA to extract potential signals of DI. However, we adopted a disproportionality measure PRR instead of RR
measure used by Harpaz et al. [22] as interestingness metric to filter significant interacting DIAE associations. Yang et al. [27] have
proposed to use association rules mining (ARM) and the metrics

leverage, confidence and PRR in order to mine the adverse drug
reactions (ADRs) reported by FDA from the users’ contributed content in social media. Their results showed that PRR performed better than the other two metrics. Therefore, in this study we assumed
that PRR metric may outperform RR measure and this can be
related to the fact that the calculation of PRR is only based on spontaneous reports which mentioned the targeted AEs rather than the
total number of records in the database. Hauben and Bate [29] said
‘‘Judicious implementation of all the methods gives comparable
results and far greater variation in performance is seen owing to
heterogeneity in implementation choices, such as threshold selection/titration and the triage logic and procedures for investigation
of signals”. With the light of these well-said words, the current
study can be distinguished in some aspects compared with the
related work conducted by Harpaz et al. [22] as illustrated in later
sections. The novelty in this work has multiple folds: (1) The proposed algorithm: PRR as one of the disproportionality measures
being employed in the bulk daily routine of PhV has been adopted
to quantify magnitude of DIs instead of confidence measure in classic Apriori; (2) An optimization technique: the implementation of
the proposed algorithm in defining frequent rules has been
enhanced as discussed later in the methodology (Section 3); (3)
The taxonomy of association patterns: although we used the same
three-elements taxonomy of Harpaz et al. [22], we were able to
distinguish between the evidenced AEs in extracted patterns and
the non-evidenced AEs to one or both drugs in a pattern; (4) A
quantitative evaluation: the algorithm performance in terms of precision, sensitivity and specificity could be done based on four trustworthy resources, despite lack of DIs’ gold standard; (5) validation:
some unknown interacting DIAE patterns could be investigated
using LR analysis for the purpose of testing confounding between
paired drugs.

3. Methodology
We organized this section into four main subsections. The first
subsection illustrates various resources used in the current study
including the data source ‘FAERS’. The following subsections discuss in details the three phases of our proposed method. Fig. 1 displays the high-level framework of the methodology used to detect
DIAE signals from spontaneous data FAERS.

3.1. Materials
3.1.1. Data source – FAERS
We used the public quarterly file package releases of the FAERS
covering the time period from 4th quarter 2012 through 2nd quarter 2013. These file packages, containing seven data files for each,
are released in two distinct formats; ASCII and SGML [15] to enable
importing into all applications for relational databases such as
Microsoft SQL, ORACLE, Microsoft Office Access and MySQL. In
our work, we used three data files: demographic [demo], drug
[drug] and reaction [reac]. We imported and integrated the three
quarters of each file type into tables on SQL server using Microsoft
business integration development studio (MS BIDS). Afterwards,
the three generated tables were linked to each other by a field of
a unique eight-digit number called ‘‘primaryid”. The reported AEs
in FAERS are coded with the ‘‘Preferred Term” level of Medical Dictionary for Regularity Activities (MedDRA) in compliance with
guidance endorsed by the International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals
for Human Use (ICH) [30,31]. However, drugs are permitted to be
registered in arbitrary names including trade names and abbreviations. Therefore, it was necessary to perform mappings of drug

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

297

Fig. 1. High-level methodology framework. FAERS denotes United States Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) adverse events reporting system. DIAE symbolizes druginteraction adverse event.

names to their generics, as illustrated later, so as not to miss significant DIAEs a result of signal dilution.
3.1.2. RxNorm–UMLS knowledge source
RxNorm is a standardized nomenclature for clinical drug entities and links its names to many sources of the drug vocabularies.
RxNorm vocabulary is among the contributing ‘‘source vocabularies” of UMLS Metathesaurus developed at the National Library of
Medicine (NLM) [32], [33].We used RxNorm for the purpose of
mapping drug names to generics. Hence, we first downloaded the
2013AB release of UMLS Metathesaurus from UMLS Knowledge
Server and imported a subset limited to RxNorm vocabulary. We
constructed a lexical table, by means of ‘MS BIDS’, containing
the drugs’ trade names and their generics using the tables
‘‘[MRCONSO] and [MRREL]” [34].
3.1.3. Reliable resources for DIs and ADRs
We have used four different resources (drugs.com, DrugBank,
Medscape and FDA labeling information) which are considered
reliable and trusted references for medications and their associated
ADRs and DIs. We used the Interactions Checker search engine of
drugs.com [35] which explains the mechanism of each drug interaction, the level of significance of the interaction (major, moderate
or minor) and in certain cases, it can provide the recommended
course of action to manage the interaction. DrugBank [36,37] is
a free online bioinformatics and cheminformatics database that
brings up the full data content for each drug entry through DrugCards in more than 200 data fields [37]. It offers a complete collection of DDIs, which is compiled from several resources, then
checked by accredited pharmacists. We believe that the ‘‘drug
interactions” field is a reliable and representative source of DIs,
since they are derived from many credible sources e.g. Epocrates
RX [38], Drugs.com [35], Physician Desk Reference (PDR) [39],
Medicines Complete [40] and e-Therapeutics [41]. Also for this
work, the Medscape [42] has been used as the grounded truth to
define both labeled/probable/non-labeled ADRs and DIs. They are
provided through the ‘Drugs & Diseases’ section where updated
information about the drug including its AEs, interactions and
warnings (e.g. black box warning, contraindications, etc.) are publically available.
The FDA label is the official description of a drug product in the
US. We downloaded FDA labels of the targeted drugs from
Drugs@FDA; the online search catalog for official information
about FDA-regulated products [43]. Particularly for this study, we
discriminated between two types of adverse reactions; evidenced

or non-evidenced. The evidenced ADR could be discriminated from
all the AEs mentioned in tables, ‘ADVERSE REACTIONS’ or ‘CONTRA
INDICATIONS’ or ‘BLACK BOX WARNING’ sections contained in the
drug label based on the following situations: an adverse reaction
adequately demonstrated in non-clinical studies and confirmed
by clinical data or an adverse reaction observed in well-designed
clinical trials or epidemiological studies for which the magnitude
of the difference compared with the comparator group, on a
parameter of interest suggests a causal relationship. While nonevidenced ADR are those mainly mentioned in ‘POST MARKETING
EXPERIENCE’ section in FDA label where there’s a potential evidence of a causal association between the drug and the AE, but a
causal relationship has not been definitely established. Also, nonevidenced ADR can be considered where there is no evidence to
be associated with the drug.
3.1.4. Experimental environment
The SQL server Business Intelligence Development Studio (BIDS)
was used to integrate FAERS_ASCII_txt files from the fourth quarter
of year 2012 till the second quarter of year 2013 and created a consolidated relational FAERS database on MS-SQL server 2008. The
hybrid Apriori algorithm; the suggested data mining method,
was implemented using the C#.NET Framework 4 programming
language as a part of Microsoft Visual Studio 2010. The logistic
regression analyses were conducted with SPSS 15.0 analytics
software.
3.2. Phase I of methodology: Dataset preparation
3.2.1. Dataset acquisition and integration
The FAERS data file packages (4th quarter of year 2012 – 2nd
quarter of year 2013) in ASCII format have been downloaded from
US FDA website [15]. The ASCII data files are flat files that are ’$’
delimited; i.e. a ’$’ separates the data fields. We used SQL server
Business Intelligence Development Studio (BIDS) to import these
flat file sources into MS SQL server for integrating and creating
relational database consisting of three target tables; ‘demo’, ‘drug’
and ‘reac’ linked to each other via the [primaryid] attribute. We
excluded drugs that were reported to have ‘concomitant’ or ‘interacting’ roles in the emerging of the reported AE. We included only
drugs with ‘primary suspect (PS)’ or ‘secondary suspect (SS)’ roles.
Moreover, uninformative terms including foods, beverages, procedures (e.g. X-ray radiation) and unspecified drugs (e.g. betablockers) were omitted for this study.

298

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

3.2.2. Data preprocessing
i. Removal of duplicate reporting
Duplicity in reporting represents an important impediment to
effective PhV. If not addressed properly, it may produce spurious
associations leading to distort statistical mining and may mislead
assessment of potential safety signals. For example, if a report
has tens of duplicates, then thousands of spurious associations will
be extracted. The FAERS database is a Case/Version-based system
where there are three identifiers of a particular FAERS report: ‘‘PRIMARYID” the unique number for identifying a FAERS report, ‘‘CASEID” a number for identifying a FAERS case (e.g. 9274534) and
‘‘CASEVERSION” a safety report version number. The ‘‘PRIMARYID”
is a concatenated key of ‘‘Case ID” and ‘‘Case Version” fields in a
demographic table. A case may consist of one or more versions; a
follow-up version (that is, the newest/latest version received by
FDA) will have the same CASE number as the initial/oldest version.
The Initial Case will be version 1; follow-ups to the case will have
sequentially incremented version numbers (for example, 2, 3, 4,
etc.). Hence, our procedure to remove duplicate reports was initially based on linking and grouping reports having the same ‘‘PRIMARYID” with a given ‘‘CASEID” and different ‘‘case versions”.
Then, according to the FDA’s recommendation of adopting the
most recent CASE version, we performed SQL query to omit the
older version(s) of a given case and keep only the most updated
ones (i.e. having the highest ‘‘Case Version”).
ii. Drug name mapping to generics
In FAERS, unlike the AEs and the indications that are coded by
MedDRA, the drugs are reported in textual terms including arbitrary drug names, trade names and abbreviations. The lack of drug
codification and redundancy of the same drug through various
reporting terms may dilute the DIAE association pattern and mask
a significant signal. Thus, mapping drug names to generics using
UMLS codes was essential before the mining step. A generic drug
is simply a branded drug that uses a different name. For example:
Metformin, used by diabetic patients, is the generic name for the
brand Glucophage. FDA considers a generic drug to be ‘‘identical,
or bioequivalent, to a brand name drug in dosage form, safety,
strength, route of administration, quality, performance characteristics and intended use” [44].
We conducted a semi-automated procedure to map the trade or
the arbitrary drug names in dataset into their generics via utilizing
exact matching technique of MS BIDS’ ‘LookUp’ tool. A lexical table
has been constructed for this purpose as previously mentioned
[34]. It consisted of four main attributes: [CUI] denotes the concept
unique identifier; [TTY] represents the term type (e.g. ‘BN’ brand
name, ‘IN’ ingredient); [STR] the string of drug name; and [REL]
relation type between concepts (e.g. has_tradename). The [CUI]
denotes the UMLS concept identifier.
3.3. Phase II of methodology: Mining DIAE association patterns –
Hybrid Apriori algorithm
Although the FDA receives an average of 500,000 drug safety
reports annually, it rarely receives reports attributed to DDIs. The
search space is therefore too huge to enumerate all possible combinations of drugs and AEs. And so using standard statistical mining algorithms used routinely in PhV for detecting DI signals was
not feasible. We propose to employ Apriori algorithm and proportional reporting ratio (PRR) to extract associations of drug interactions from FAERS. Apriori algorithm, as a type of association rules
mining (ARM), has been employed to generate three-itemset/3itemset DIAE candidates fDrug 1 [ Drug 2 ) Adv erseEv entg or
fD1 [ D2 ) AE}. The next step has depended on computing PRR,

as a disproportionality measure, of each DIAE candidate to score
associations of drug pairs with AEs. The analysis of potential DIs
is based on the concept that a reported AE is more often reported
on the drugs combination compared with the situation where
either of these drugs has been used in absence of the other one. Filtering of DIAE signals has been conducted using pre-defined
thresholds of support, PRR and Chi square (X 2 ) metrics. In this
work, Chi square has been examined to reject the hypothesis that
the proposed method detected DIs by chance.
3.3.1. The classic Apriori
Association rules mining (ARM) [45] is one of the wellestablished data mining techniques for discovering interesting
relationships hidden in large databases. The technique has been
developed in computer science for over a decade and has been
used in a variety of fields [46–48]. Recently, ARM has been applied
in PhV for identification of complex or higher-dimensional drug
safety patterns [49]. Association rule mining can be defined mathematically as follows; let I ¼ fI1 ; I2 ; I3 ; . . . ; In g is a set of items in a
database where each transaction T is a set of items such that
T # I. An association rule is an implication expression of the form
fX 1 ; X 2 ; X 3 ; . . . ; X n g ! Y where X # I; Y # I and both X and Y are sets
of items. Each association rule is referred to as an itemset [45]. An
itemset contains k items in a k-itemset. In the case of PhV; X
denotes a set of drugs and Y denotes a set of AEs. For example,
the drug-set {rosiglitazone} is a 1-itemset, the drug-set {rosiglitazone, metformin} is a 2-itemset and the set {rosiglitazone, metformin, myocardial infarction} is a 3-itemset.
Apriori algorithm is a type of ARM that partially mitigates the
challenge of hard computation of association rules [45]. The principle of classic Apriori is based on two steps. The first step searches
for item sets that exceed the minimum support, while in the second step, association rules are generated and filtered by selecting
‘‘confident” item sets (based on a threshold) from those found in
the first step. The support of an itemset SðXÞ is the number of
records containing X. The support of an association rule SðX ! YÞ
is equal to SðX [ YÞ. Low support may indicate that a rule has simply occurred by chance. The confidence of a rule CðX ! YÞ is equal
to ðSðX [ YÞÞ=ðSðXÞÞ. Confidence determines how often items in Y
appear in records that contain/contains X. Confidence provides
an estimate of ðPrðYÞ=ðXÞÞ, the conditional probability of Y given
X. Significant association rules can be filtered by given minimum
support and confidence thresholds [50]. However, identification
of multi-item DIAE association rules is rarely reported in biomedical literature.
In this study, a modified model of Apriori algorithm was developed by including all reports in dataset for the purpose of detecting
DIAE signals. We regarded all drugs and adverse events as items
I ¼ fI1 ; I2 ; In g and reports as transactions in association mining.
Our goal is to mine rules of a 3-itemset in the form of
D1 [ D2 ) AE. Instead of confidence, we used PRR as a disproportionality measure to score the strength of an association rule/pattern. The inappropriateness of confidence to this research stems
from the fact that frequent AEs such as nausea are likely to generate large confidence values regardless of the drug combinations
associated with it. While rare AEs are very likely to have a small
portion of the total number of reports, hence they produce small
confidence values despite being strongly associated with certain
drug pairs. Instead, we propose using proportional reporting ratio
(PRR) and Chi square ðX 2 Þ as measures of interestingness to filter
strong interacting DIAE association patterns.
3.3.2. Measures
3.3.2.1. PRR. The PRR measure, proposed in 2001 by Evan et al. [51]
is the risk ratio between getting the AE in the exposed group and in

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

the comparison groups. PRR is one of the most frequent disproportionality analyses (DPA) which is used in the bulk of daily routine
of PhV by regularity agencies (e.g. Eudravigilance-EMEA) for single
drug – single AE detection. The reduction of ADE analysis to 2D
dimensionality may result in missing clinically crucial information.
In this study, we have adopted the PRR for higher dimensional
associations (i.e. DIs) by investigating the excess reporting of an
AE in the presence of a combination of two drugs together which
is more than that reported with all other drug combinations in
dataset. The PRR has the advantages that it is easy to be calculated,
interpreted and derived from SRS data. To facilitate the discussion
of DIAE signal detection by PRR, we have considered a set of
adverse events ‘J’ to different drug combinations ‘I’ within a specified time period as shown in Table 1.
To simplify the calculation of PRR, this I  J contingency table
(Table 1) can be compacted to 2  2 contingency table (Table 2)
for all drugs combinations except for a specific drug combination
D1 & D2 , notated as Di and adverse event AE, notated as AEj .
P
Here, ni: ¼ j nij is the total number of AE reports in dataset for
P
certain drug combination Di , n:j ¼ i nij is the number of FAERS
reports in dataset for adverse event AEj across all drug combinaP
tions, n:: ¼ ij nij is the total number of FAERS reports in dataset
for all AEs across all drug combinations. An alternative notation
commonly used in PhV literature a, b, c and d (Refer to Table 2).
Hence, the PRR can be computed as follows;

PRR ¼

supportfDi )AEg
supportfDi g
supportf!Di )AEg
supportf!Di g

¼

nij
ni:
fn:j nij g
fn:: ni: g

¼

a=ða þ bÞ
c=ðc þ dÞ

ð1Þ

PRR provides an estimate of prðAE;Di Þ=prðAE;!Di Þ. Then, calculating
95% confidence interval ðCIÞ for the natural logarithm of PRR as
follows;

pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
1
1
1
95% CI ¼ PRR  e1:96 ðaaþbþc cþdÞ

ð2Þ

3.3.2.2. Chi square X 2 . Chi square ðX 2 Þ is another measure that is
utilized to assess the interestingness of the pattern. It compares
the distribution of expected counts under the null hypothesis
(DIAE signals resulted by chance) to the observed counts in data.

Table 1
I  J contingency table.
Adverse events
Drug combinations
1
1
2
...
i
...
I

2

...

j

...

J

299

It measures the level of dependency between variables and under
the null hypothesis X 2 statistics is distributed as in the following
equation;

X2 ¼

n
X
ðEi  Oi Þ2
i¼1

Ei



ðEa  Oa Þ2 ðEb  Ob Þ2 ðEc  Oc Þ2 ðEd  Od Þ2
þ
þ
þ
Ea
Eb
Ec
Ed
ð3Þ

Here; Oi represents an observed frequency and Ei represents the
expected frequency of a variable of interest. To test for significance,
results with X 2 P 4 are considered to be significant.
3.3.3. Implementation framework
3.3.3.1. Task 1 – Defining frequent itemsets for potential DIAE
association patterns. screening FAERS dataset to identify all frequent itemsets for potential DIAE patterns was not an easy task
due to high dimensionality of the data. The search space grows
exponentially with the size of k-itemset investigated. We have a
total of 14319 unique drugs & unique AEs under consideration.
Consequently the number of possible DIAEs due to a combination
of two drugs that are needed to be examined was nearly
143193 = 312. Therefore, enumerating all possible DIAEs was not
feasible using standard DPAs that are routinely used in PhV. Consequently, we adopted hybrid Apriori approach based on the principle of classic Apriori in generating frequent associations according
to prespecified minimum thresholds. In classic Apriori [45], in each
iteration, a candidate set of k-itemset is constructed, the number of
occurrences of each candidate itemset Ci is counted by self-joining
frequent itemset (Li1 ⁄ Li1) and then infrequent itemsets are
pruned based on pre-determined minimum support to generate
frequent ones Li. The higher the frequent itemset Li+1 is to be generated, the more candidate itemset Ci+1 and the higher the processing cost of determining Li will be.
In hybrid Apriori, in addition to trimming by minimum support
threshold, the pruning of infrequent itemsets has been optimized
using another feature. Unlike the classic Apriori, the candidate
itemsets and their report primary IDs were generated in each iteration rather than scanning the database after the first pass. Those
primary IDs of each candidate set have been exploited to allocate
the reports to be scanned instead of scanning the whole database
in the next iterations in order to generate candidates of (k + 1)itemset. Hence, this pruning technique enabled us to efficiently
trim the search space and reduce the computational cost for later
iterations. Figs. 2.1a, 2.1b and 2.1c show the detailed steps that
have been followed to achieve task 1.
3.3.3.2. Task 2 – Computing PRR and Chi-Square for generated DIAE
itemsets. As illustrated in the previous subsection that the {a, b, c,
d} entries of contingency table (Refer to Table 2) were used to calculate PRR and chi-square X 2 . We could get the count of DrugSet
fD1 [ D2 g for each DIAE patterns fD1 [ D2 ) AEg from the output
L2 of step ‘1A’ within task 1, notated as ða þ bÞ in contingency table.

Table 2
2  2 Contingency table for computation of proportional reporting ratio (PRR) disproportionality measure. The Di symbol notates specific drug combination. The AEj symbol
notates the targeted adverse event AE. The !Di symbol notates other drug pairs in database. The !AEj symbol notates other adverse events in the database.
P
AE
Other AEs
row
AEj
!AEj
Specific-drug combination
Di
Other-drug combinations
!D
Pi
colum

fnij g
a
fn:j  nij g
c
fn:j g
a+c

fni:  nij g
b
fðn::  n:j Þ  ðni: þ nij Þg
d
fn::  n:j g
b+d

ni:
a+b
fn::  ni: g
c+d
fn:: g
a+b+c+d

300

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

Fig. 2.1a. Step 1a – hybrid Apriori algorithm to identify frequent drug pairs. Dn denotes a particular drug. C1 denotes a set of single drug candidates (i.e. the listing of distinct
drugs in drug table). L1 denotes frequent single drugs (1-itemset) by scanning the whole drug table. C2 denotes a set of candidate drug pairs (2-itemset). L2 denotes frequent
drug pairs (2-itemset). Supp denotes the support of k-itemset. Report ID denotes the ‘‘primary ID” where k-itemset exists.

Fig. 2.1b. Step 1b – hybrid Apriori algorithm for identifying the support of reported adverse events (AE). The ‘‘reac” symbolizes the reaction table.

Fig. 2.1c. Step 1c – hybrid Apriori algorithm for generating significant association patterns of drug-interaction adverse event (DIAE). C3 denotes a set of 3-itemset candidates
between frequent drug pairs {L2} & reported adverse events {AE}. L3 denotes frequent DIAE rules (3-itemset) to compute signal scores in order to filter significant DIAE
association patterns.

Also, we could get the count of Adv erseEv entSet fAEg for each DIAE
patterns fD1 [ D2 ) AEg from step ‘1B’ of task 1, notated as ða þ cÞ
in the contingency table. While, we could obtain the ‘‘a” entry of
contingency table from L3 output in task 1 that represent the frequent DIAE patterns.
3.3.3.3. Task 3 – Filtering. we utilized a composite criterion to filter
significant DIAE association patterns (positive test cases) using
predefined thresholds suggested in similar studies [22,51]. Those
values have been identified as meaningful thresholds in previous

work. Each significant interacting DIAE pattern must have the following parameters: minimum support P 20 [22], PRR05 P 2 [51]
and X 2 P 4 [51]. Those parameters have been imposed to exclude
non-interacting DIAE patterns (negative test cases) that could not
be statistically convincing as signals.
3.4. Phase III methodology: Benchmarking
We qualitatively and quantitatively evaluated the efficiency of
hybrid Apriori in identifying known DIAEs signals from SRS such

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

as FAERS. In addition, previously unknown DIAE patterns have
been validated by testing for confounding by interacting drugs
using logistic regression (LR) modeling.
3.4.1. Quantitative evaluation
Four metrics: precision, negative predictive value (NPV), sensitivity and specificity [52–54] were estimated to assess the performance of the proposed method in signaling known interacting
DIAE patterns and not signaling non-interacting ones from FAERS.
We randomly selected equal sized sets as follows; 100 negative
test cases (non-interacting DIAE patterns) and 100 positive test
cases (interacting DIAE patterns) constrained to serious ones. We
manually classified the seriousness of the adverse events/reactions
included in the evaluation dataset of positive test cases using
the criteria established in ICH-E2A [31]. The AE or suspected
adverse drug reaction is considered ‘‘serious” if, in the view of
either the investigator or sponsor, it results in any of the following
outcomes: Death, a life-threatening AE, inpatient hospitalization or
prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant
incapacity or substantial disruption of the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Also, AE
is considered serious if it requires medical or surgical intervention
to prevent one of the outcomes previously listed.
Precision defines the ratio of the interacting DIAE patterns
returned by the method that are true according to the reference
resources, divided by the total number of significant DIAE patterns
(positive test cases) detected by the method. Negative predictive
value (NPV) defines as the ratio of the non-interacting DIAE patterns returned by the method that are true according to the reference resources divided by total number of non-significant DIAE
patterns (negative test cases) identified by the method. Sensitivity
(also called recall or true positive rate) measures the ratio of the
number of significant DIAE patterns that are identified by the
method divided by the total number of the corresponding DIAEs
in the reference standard. Specificity (also called true negative
rate) measures the proportion of true negatives which are correctly
identified by the method correctly corresponding to the negative
associations in the reference standard. The aforementioned metrics
are calculated according to the following equations by using the
entries shown in Table 3;

Precision ¼

NPV ¼

TP
TP þ FP

ð4Þ

TN
TN þ FN

ð5Þ

TP
TP þ FN

ð6Þ

TN
Specificity ¼
TN þ FP

ð7Þ

Sensitivity ¼

where true positives (TP), the number of DIAE signals detected by
the proposed algorithm and exist in the reference standards; true

Table 3
2  2 Table for estimating the performance of hybrid Apriori algorithm. ‘TP’ denotes
true positive. ‘FP’ denotes false positive. ‘FN’ denotes false negative. ‘TN’ denotes true
negative.
Reliable resources (reality)

Mining outcome
DIAE association
patterns

Positive test cases
Negative test
cases

Interaction

Nointeraction

TP
FN

FP
TN

301

negative (TN), the number of DIAEs that are not detected by the
proposed algorithm as DIs and do not present in the reference standards; (TP + FP), the number of significant DIAEs detected by the
proposed algorithm where FP is false positive; (TN + FN), the number of non-interacting DIAE patterns that are not detected by the
proposed algorithm; (TP + FN), the number of DIAEs in the reference databases (labeled interaction) where FN is false negative;
(TN + FP), the number of non-interacting DIAEs not in the reference
databases (non-labeled interaction).
Despite the lack of a proper gold standard for all known DIs,
true positive (TP) and true negative (TN) cases have been assigned
to the best existing knowledge (Section 3.1). They were separately
queried from textual monographs on DrugBank, drugs.com and
Medscape, in addition pieces of information in different sections
of FDA labels which briefly describe any known or predicted DIs/
ADRs. Each drug pair – AE combination has been classified as a positive test case or a negative test case (control) on the basis of the
following criteria:
True positive cases (TP)/False negative cases (FN);
(1) The AE listed in ‘‘Adverse Reactions” section or ‘‘CONTRA
INDICATIONs” section or ‘‘Drug Interactions” section or
‘‘Boxed Warning or Warnings/Precautions” sections of active
FDA structured product label.
(2) The AE has been alerted by FDA or labeled by pharmaceutical companies.
(3) The interaction is listed in ‘‘Drug Interactions” data field of
DrugCard on DrugBank website.
(4) The interaction is categorized as ‘‘major” or ‘‘moderate” or
‘‘minor” by Drugs.com Interactions Checker search engine.
(5) The AE is listed in {‘‘Interactions” or ‘‘Adverse Effects” or
‘‘warnings”} subsection of ‘‘Drugs & Diseases” section on
Medscape website.
True negative cases (TN)/False positive cases (FP);
(1) The AE is not listed anywhere in any section of active FDA
structured product label.
(2) The AE has not been alerted by FDA or labeled by pharmaceutical companies.
(3) The interaction is not listed in ‘‘Drug Interactions” data field
of DrugCard on DrugBank website.
(4) The interaction is not categorized as ‘‘major” or ‘‘moderate”
or ‘‘minor” by Drugs.com Interactions Checker search
engine.
(5) The AE is not listed in {‘‘Interactions” or ‘‘Adverse Effects” or
‘‘warnings”} subsection of ‘‘Drugs & Diseases” section on
Medscape website.
3.4.2. Qualitative evaluation
The same sample of interacting DIAE patterns (100 positive test
cases), used in quantitative evaluation, was qualitatively analyzed
by assigning a taxonomy to each pattern. The taxonomy consists of
three elements; the interacting drugs, the AE and the interaction as
shown in Table 6. The ‘Interacting drugs’ level categorizes the combined drugs in the pattern into (A1, A2) based on their relation to
each other. The ‘AE’ level assigns four categories (B1, B2, B3 and B4)
according to the relation of AE to each of the combined drugs in a
pattern. The ‘‘Interaction” level defines the interaction type of association pattern using the reference resources (Refer to Sections 3.1
and 3.4.1) into interacting ‘C1’, or non-interacting ‘C2’.
3.4.3. Validation
Referring to DIs’ reference standards, unknown positive test
cases (interacting DIAEs) have been interpreted as FPs (being undetectable) and unreported negative test cases (non-interacting

302

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

DIAEs) have been correctly classified as TNs (being ineligible for
reporting). Unreported positive test cases have been classified as
FPs, but they can be potential DI signals that have not been identified yet and may deserve more attention and further investigation.
To examine the statistical significance of interacting effects in
undocumented positive test cases resulting from the mining
phase; we employed logistic regression (LR) statistic for the purpose of adjusting for confounding by co-medication [29]. Since
the LR outperforms DPA-based approaches across all levels of sensitivity/specificity [55].
The LR, proposed by Van Puijenbroek [19,20], is a type of predictive modeling that is used to relate a dependent variable (DV) with
a set of independent variables (IV). The term ‘‘confounding” refers
to a situation where finding a spurious association or missing a
true association between an independent variable (drug) and
dependent variable (reported AE) is a result of a third factor or
group of factors referred to as confounding variable [56]. There
are several types of confounders ranging from simpler types such
as confounding by age, gender and year, moving to more complex
ones such as syndromes or DIs [57–59]. Here, we investigated the
interaction between paired medications (IV) probably resulting in
emergence/intensifying the reported AE (DV). LR estimates logarithm of a most frequent disproportionality measure called reporting odds ratio (ROR). The computation of the ROR is based upon the
entries of 2  2 table (Refer to Table 2). The ROR is used to determine whether a particular exposure (e.g. drug pair) is associated
with a particular outcome (e.g. AE). It is used to compare the relative odds of the occurrence of an AE, given exposure to a specific
drug pair. Its computation follows the principles of a case-control
study. In other means, it is calculated by dividing all records in
the database into cases and noncases according to different AEs,
all records in cases are defined as patients who reported a particular AE, while non-cases consist of all other reports [60].

ROR ¼

a=b
nij
¼
c=d fni:  nij g



fn:j  nij g
Pr
¼
fðn::  n:j Þ  ðni: þ nij Þg 1  Pr

ð8Þ

Under the assumption of no interaction, the ROR associated
with the drug combination is the same as the product of the ROR
associated with each drug in the absence of the other. Thus if,
RORdrug 1 [ drug 2 =ðRORdrug 1  RORdrug 2 Þ is statistically different
from 1, there is evidence of an interaction. In particular, whenever
this measure is greater than 1, there is a positive interaction which
is of interest from a drug safety perspective. In such situation, the
ROR associated with two drugs administered in combination is
greater than the product of the RORs associated with each drug
separately.
The formal statistical testing of the interaction term is achieved
within the framework of logistic regression as shown in the following equation;

LogðROR of AEÞ ¼ a þ bðdrug 1 Þ þ cðdrug 2 Þ þ dðdrug 1 [ drug 2 Þ
ð9Þ
where ‘d’ is the interaction coefficient. The exponential of d, exp (d),
is the factor by which the reporting odds ratio (ROR) associated
with a drug pair (drug1 [ drug2) exceeds that is predicted by each
drug of the pair alone. Whenever the score of exp (d) is significantly
different from 1 with a p-value <0.05, there is evidence of an interaction and vice versa. That is, the ROR for the drug combination is
significantly greater than that predicted for the first drug alone
and the second drug alone. Hence, values for exp (d) which are significantly greater than 1 indicate a positive measure of interaction.
As the LR requires the predictors (i.e. interacting drugs) first to
be selected in advance to be included in the regression model, we
made use of FP DIAEs (undocumented positive test cases) generated by the hybrid Apriori to provide the appropriate statistical

context to assume predictors for LR modeling. We constructed a
binary Boolean matrix (1, 0) to prepare a dataset for conducting
LR analyses by visualizing presence/absence of targeted drug pairs
and AEs. If two drugs co-occurred with a particular AE have been
reported in a certain FAERS report, then this report was labeled
‘‘1” in the matrix for its drug pair and AE, otherwise labeled as
‘‘0” as displayed in Fig. 3. All the LR analyses were performed using
software package of SPSS 15.0.
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Data and association statistics
Table 4 shows a summary of FAERS dataset’s statistics representing the time span from the 4th quarter 2012 till the 2nd quarter 2013. Procedures followed to preprocess the dataset have
reduced the overall number of FAERS reports into 632722 reports
involving 3655 AEs and 3030 drugs. We included only drugs with
a role in emerging the reported AE either as a primary suspect
‘PS’ or as a secondary suspect ‘SS’.
As previously illustrated, the hybrid Apriori has been implemented in three steps: (i) defining frequent itemsets for potential
DIAE association patterns; (ii) computing metrics of PRR and ChiSquare for the generated frequent DIAE itemsets; (iii) filtering
strong DIAE association patterns based on predefined thresholds
of composite criteria. This resulted in identifying a total of 2933
interacting DIAE patterns (positive test cases) involving 1256 serious DIAEs. The resulting patterns encompassed 467 different drugs
and 1025 different AEs. In addition, the algorithm produced a total
of 530 non-interacting DIAE patterns (negative test cases) that did
not fulfil the filtering parameters.
4.2. Evaluation
4.2.1. Quantitative evaluation
We assessed the performance of the hybrid Apriori in detecting
known interacting DIAE signals (TP) and known non-interacting
DIAE patterns (TN) in terms of precision, negative predictive value,
sensitivity and specificity metrics. We could differentiate DIAEs
detected by our method with those evidenced DIAEs in reference
resources (as discussed in Section 3). Based on the entries shown
in Table 3, the results show that 85 true interacting DIAEs out of
100 sampled positive test cases (85% precision, 81% sensitivity)
and 80 true non-interacting DIAEs out of 100 sampled negative test
cases (84% specificity, 80% NPV) have been correctly allocated.
Also, the results show fifteen interacting DIAE patterns interpreted
as false positives/interactions as the involved drug pairs do not
present in the reference resources and there are twenty noninteracting DIAE patterns which do not represent significant interactions when in fact the drug pair is evidenced in at least one of the
reference resources (i.e. false negatives) (Refer to Section 3.4).
Table 5 provides representative examples of non-interacting DIAE
patterns classified as TNs/FNs according to the trustworthy DI
resources (Section 3), along with the support, PRR05 and X2 values
for each.
4.2.2. Qualitative evaluation
Qualitative analysis of a sample of 100 serious DIAE patterns
could extrapolate the full set of potential DIAE signals (1256 serious DIAEs out of total 2933 interacting DIAE patterns) identified
by our method. This sample was given to two additional clinical
experts who worked independently to qualitatively evaluate the
proposed algorithms according to the pre-defined taxonomy
(Table 6). Known DI signals have been validated by those experts
using drugs.com interaction checker and Lexicomp. Each DIAE

303

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

Fig. 3. Printscreen of Boolean matrix of FDA adverse event reporting system (FAERS) dataset.

Table 4
Statistics of FAERS dataset & collection.
Time span of the study
Demographic table [demo]
Total number of reports
Number of duplicate reports – recent [CASE]
selection
Reaction table [reac]
Total number of records
Number of AE set
Drug table [drug]
Number [drug] table records after excluding
concomitant & interacting drugs &
preprocessing
Number of drug name set

4th quarter 2012 – 2nd
quarter 2013
632,722
995 duplicated reports

1,938,315
11,879
812,348

2440

Table 5
Examples of non-interacting DIAE patterns (negative test cases) not signaled by
hybrid Apriori. Each non-interacting pattern does not satisfy the composite criteria of
a significant interaction; minimum support P20, lower-bound PRR score P2 and chisquare measure X2 P4. The (S) symbol denotes support of the {drug pair – AE}
pattern. The ‘‘PRR05’ abbreviates the lower bound of disproportionality measure
‘‘proportional reporting ratio”. The ‘X2’ indicates chi-square metric.
Label

Non-interacting DIAE

(S)

PRR05

X2

TN
FN

Peginterferon Alfa-2a, Ribavirin ? Dysphonia
Drospirenone, Ethinyl Estradiol ? Speech
disorder
Hydrochlorothiazide, Valsartan ? Cardiac arrest
Budesonide, Formoterol ? Pain in extremity
Peginterferon Alfa-2b, Ribavirin ? Suicidal
ideation
Metformin, Sitagliptin ? Death
Emtricitabine, Tenofovir ? Drug ineffective
Peginterferon Alfa-2a, Ribavirin ?
Hypothyroidism
Hydrochlorothiazide, Valsartan ? Acute renal
failure

25
30

0.36
0.32

0.30
0.30

21
25
38

0.63
0.49
0.21

0.25
0.01
0.89

20
22
22

0.66
0.73
0.77

0.34
1.38
1.90

20

0.76

1.18

TN
TN
FN
TN
TN
FN
TN

pattern’s taxonomy is described in three elements: drugs (A),
adverse event (B) and their interaction (C). Table 6 shows these
taxonomy elements along with the corresponding proportion for
each.
The A1 characterizes drug pair in a DIAE known to be given
together or for treating the same indication. A2 characterizes unrelated drugs prescribed for different indications/medical conditions.
As seen in Table 6, a small number of associations (16%) contains
unrelated interacting drugs e.g. amlodipine (antihypertensive) and
simvastatin (antihyperlipidemia). A significant proportion (84%) of
drugs is paired because either paired drugs are usually combined
in the same drug formulation, e.g., amoxicillin, clavulanate (antibiotics), or they are administered together to treat certain disease:
as in chemotherapeutic regimens e.g. cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin, antidiabetic drugs, glimepiride and metformin, etc.

AEs are categorized in a similar manner as displayed in Table 6:
B1 characterizes evidenced ADR for only one of the paired drugs.
For example the DIAE pattern {Lisinopril, Metformin ? lactic acidosis}, lactic acidosis is a serious metabolic complication that is
fatal in approximately 50% of cases. It can occur due to metformin
accumulation, so the risk of lactic acidosis increases with the
degree of renal dysfunction and the patient’s age. The documented
interaction for this drug pair is the probable increase of metformin
effect on lowering blood sugar. FDA has warned rare incidence of
lactic acidosis in patients with renal impairment receiving
metformin [61]. I.e. the reported AE lactic acidosis is only stated
to metformin.

304

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

Table 6
Taxonomy of interacting drug interaction adverse events (DIAEs) {test positive cases}.
Interacting drugs

Proportion
(%)

A1

84

A2

Drugs known to be given together or treat the same
indication
Unrelated drugs

Adverse Event (AE)
B1 Evidenced ADR for only one of the two drugs, i.e. well
known to cause effect
B2 Evidenced ADR, Both drugs known/labeled to cause effect
B3 Non-evidenced ADR, Both drugs potentially known or
unknown to cause effect
B4 Confounded association, either the AE is the indication
which the drugs treat; or remote indication that the AE is
a sign of the indication that the drugs treats or a
consequence of disease progression; or other that the
reported AE is not characterizable as one of the above
Interaction
C1 Known drug interaction: one drug intensify the effects of
the other or one drug decrease the effect of the other, or
the combination produce a new response
C2 Unknown drug interaction

16
43
48
8
1

85

15

The B2 describes an evidenced ADR for both drugs in a particular DIAE. As an example, the reported AE asthma in a DIAE pattern
{Esomeprazole, Formoterol ? Asthma} has been labeled as ADR for
both esomeprazole (gastric ulcer treatment) and formoterol (maintenance treatment for asthma) [62,63]. Long-acting b-agonists
involving formoterol have been received ‘‘black box” warning
because of reports of the occurrences of severe asthma exacerbations in some asthmatic patients, with some associated deaths
[64]. While the clinically AE ‘asthma aggravated’ has been reported
to esomeprazole as a rare ADR based on clinical trials done over
15,000 patients (aged 18–84 years) to evaluate the safety of oral
NEXIUMÒ [62].
The B3 characterizes non-evidenced ADR for both drugs in a
particular DIAE. In some patterns (8%), none of the paired drugs
are evidenced to cause the reported AE. For example the DIAE
{Remifentanil, Sevoflurane ? Pneumonia}, none of the reference
resources have stated that remifentanil or sevoflurane or both
induces/induce pneumonia, i.e. this DIAE pattern is FP. In addition,
this DIAE pattern, with supp = 35, PRR05 = 19.79 and X2 = 673.48, is
in disagreement with the result stated by Alisa et al. [65]. The
authors revealed that the drug combination remifentanil/sevoflurane anaesthesia used in major cardiac surgery decreases the risk
factors which may result in ventilator-associated pneumonia
(VAP) and hence decreases its occurrence [65].
Confounding (notated as B4 in taxonomy) has been identified in
a minor number of DIAEs (1%) where the reported AE is either the

indication for which the drugs treat or remote indication that the
AE is known to be a consequence of the indication that the drugs
treats, or the AE is another medical condition accompanied with
the primary indication. An example of confounding is the DIAE pattern {Entacapone, Levodopa ? Parkinson’s disease}. Entacapone is
used for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease as an adjunct to
levodopa/carbidopa therapy. In the North American and Nordic
studies, a significant worsening of Parkinson symptoms has been
resulted due to the abrupt withdrawal of entacapone without
alteration of the dose of levodopa/carbidopa [66]. Table 7 provides
representative examples of interacting DIAE signals according to
their taxonomy, along with absolute support (S), PRR05 and chi
square (X 2 ) values for each. In another example, the drug pattern
{Aspirin/Clopidogrel} shows strong association with the reported
AE myocardial infarction (MI), although these medications are
used to treat or reduce the symptoms of MI (i.e., confounded association B4). On the contrary to our result, a clinical study (CAPRIE)
showed 23% risk reduction in MI within group of (Clopidogrel
+ Aspirin) compared with (placebo + Aspirin) group [67].
In a substantial proportion (85%) of significant interacting DIAE
patterns, drugs in a pair were known to interact with one another.
While a known DI can be seen for example in the drug pair {Dexamethasone, Lenalidomide} associates the ‘deep vein thromboses’
AE with co-occurrence frequency = 22. It was previously reported
that lenalidomide as a single agent does not significantly increase
the risk of venous thromboembolism, however the risk of thrombosis fluctuates considerably by concomitant use of lenalidomide
with high doses dexamethasone [68,69].

4.2.2.1. Identifying serious DDIs. Drug interaction is classified
according to the degree of severity: (i) contraindicated: it means
that this drug combination is never to be used due to potential
for serious/life-threatening interaction; (ii) major/serious (highly
clinically significant): it means that the risk of the interaction outweighs the benefit, avoiding combinations is necessary; (iii) moderate/significant (moderately clinically significant): it means that
the combined drugs are only used under special circumstances
and preferably avoid combinations; (iv) minor: it means that the
interaction is minimally clinically significant [70].
FDA has issued an official alert in April 2012 regarding the possibility of developing severe and life-threatening arterial or venous
thrombotic (VTE) events triggered by oral contraceptive drug combination YAZÒ {Drospirenone, Ethinyl Estradiol} [71]. Our findings
coincide with this FDA alert within the same year represented in a
number of DIAE patterns concerning various VTE events (e.g. pulmonary embolism, pelvic venous thrombosis, cerebral infarction,
etc).

Table 7
Examples of significant drug interaction patterns (positive test cases). DIAE denotes drug-interaction adverse event. The (S) symbol denotes absolute support of a particular DIAE
pattern. The ‘‘PRR05” abbreviates the lower bound of disproportionality measure ‘‘proportional reporting ratio”. The ‘X2’ indicates the chi-square metric.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Taxonomy

DIAE example

(S)

PRR05

X2

A2, B1, C2
A2, B2, C1
A1, B3, C2
A1–B4–C2
A1–B3–C2
A1, B4, C2
A1, B2, C1
A1, B1, C1
A1, B2, C1
A1, B1, C1
A1, B2, C1
A2, B3, C2
A1, B1, C1
A1, B2, C1

Lisinopril, Metformin ? lactic acidosis
Esomeprazole, Formoterol ? Asthma
Remifentanil, Sevoflurane ? Pneumonia
Buprenorphine, Naloxone ? Hepatitis C
Entacapone, Levodopa ? Parkinson’s disease
Aspirin, Clopidogrel ? myocardial infarction
Mycophenolate, Tacrolimus ? Cytomegalovirus infection
Mycophenolate, Tacrolimus ? Diabetes mellitus
Abciximab, Heparin ? Death
Budesonide, Formoterol ? Visual impairment
Ezetimibe, simvastatin ? rhabdomyolysis
Esomeprazole, Rosuvastatin ? Arthritis
Dexamethasone, Lenalidomide ? Deep vein thrombosis
Abacavir, Ritonavir ? Lactic acidosis

20
49
35
29
35
34
31
23
23
47
20
20
22
24

42.55
14.23
19.79
14.85
19.79
4.97
17.25
6.01
18.66
4.20
12.36
4.23
2.29
23.59

834.62
659.49
673.48
398.87
673.48
165.68
510.11
129.04
421.32
170.71
238.16
78.25
45.48
548.68

305

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

The drug pair {Mycophenolate (MMF) and Tacrolimus} shows
significant association with reported AE ‘Cytomegalovirus infection’ (PRR05 17.25). This interaction is documented as high likelihood serious or life-threatening interaction and contraindicated
unless benefits outweigh risks as both drugs may increase risk of
serious fungal, viral, bacterial and protozoal infections and lymphoma due to immunosuppression [72,73]. Likewise, the same
drug pair shows strong association with the reported AE ‘Diabetes
Mellitus’. This finding coincides with FDA labeling information
stating that ‘‘Patients randomized to Tacrolimus/MMF were more
likely to develop diabetes after the transplantation” [73].
Also, the study results show another serious DIAE example
{Abciximab, Heparin ? Death}. This finding coincides with the
standard resources stating that the interaction between both anticoagulants heparin and abciximab may increase the effects of each
other by pharmacodynamic synergism, as a consequence serious or
life-threatening interactions may occur. This combination is contraindicated unless benefits outweigh risks and no alternatives
are available [74,75].
Also, the proposed method reveals a capability to extract rare
ADRs related to drug combinations. For example, the drug combination Budesonide and Formoterol (symbicortÒ) shows a significant interaction pattern (A1–B1–C1) with the AE visual
impairment (PRR05 4.20) which harmonizes with its labeling
information [76]. Likewise example 11, the interaction between
the statins drug pair ‘ezetimibe and simvastatin’ results in a serious and rare AE called rhabdomyolysis. Statins belong to a class
of drugs used to lower bad cholesterol levels by inhibiting the
enzyme HMG-CoA reductase which plays a central role in the production of cholesterol in the liver and producing about 70 percent
of total cholesterol in the body.
One of the regulatory actions undertaken by DRA is the introduction of black boxed warnings into drug labels. This type of warnings
is the highest level of five possible warning categories found in the
drug package insert. Example 14 illustrates one of these particular
cases. FDA has inserted black box warning for the life-threatening
AE ‘lactic acidosis’ which has been reported with the use of the
nucleoside analogue ‘abacavir’ alone or in combination with other
antiretroviral drugs [77]. Diabetic ketoacidosis has been reported
during post marketing surveillance in HIV-infected patients receiving protease inhibitor therapy ‘ritonavir’ [78].
Overall speaking, the proposed algorithm can effectively detect
serious life-threatening FDA-labeled or FDA-alerted DIAEs, in addition to its ability to extract rare ADRs labeled by the pharmaceutical companies. Those DIAE patterns have high PRR values
suggesting stronger associations.
4.2.3. Validation
The LR statistic has shown superiority to DPA-based approaches
across all levels of sensitivity/specificity in Harpaz et al. study [55].
Thus, it has been adopted as another statistic to validate potential

DIAE signals (previously unknown) generated by the hybrid Apriori. This is based on LR characteristics in guarding against spurious
DIAE associations by testing confounding between concomitant
drugs [29,56]. The principle of LR model used in this study is that
a particular AE is more often reported on the combination of two
drugs compared with the situation where either of these drugs is
used in the absence of the other one according to the LR equation
previously illustrated in sub-Section 3.4.3.
The exponential of interaction coefficient, exp (d), for the ten
unknown interacting DIAE patterns that were randomly selected
from the evaluation sample, are summarized in Table 8. The {Sitagliptin, Metformin ? Pancreatic carcinoma (PC)} pattern shows
negative association (ROR = 0.69), i.e. patients exposed to {sitagliptin, metformin} drug pair have 31% (1–0.69) decreased odds of PC
relative to non-exposed group. While the model reported significant association of PC with sitagliptin alone (ROR = 83.7). The
FDA has issued safety communications in March 2013 about the
potential risk of pre-cancerous findings of the pancreas associated
with incretin mimetics e.g. sitagliptin. This action was based on
unpublished findings by a group of academic researchers that suggest an increased risk of pre-cancerous cellular changes called pancreatic duct metaplasia in patients with type 2 diabetes treated
with a class of drugs ‘incretin mimetics’ [79]. Laboratory data confirms a beneficial role of metformin in reducing or preventing PC
and suggests that incretin mimetics may increase the risk of PC
[79]. Hence, our LR model finding suggests that the combined
administration of metformin with sitagliptin may decrease PC risk.
The LR model of the {Buprenorphine, Naloxone ? Hepatitis C}
pattern shows insignificant interaction. According to FDA labeling
information of SuboxoneÒ (Buprenorphine/Naloxone), it is indicated as a maintenance treatment in opioid dependence [80]. It
has been observed in the presence of pre-existing infection with
hepatitis C virus in the addict population receiving buprenorphine
both in clinical trials and in post marketing AE reports [80]. Thus, it
does not exceed being a spurious DIAE that has been filtered as a
significant association due to overlapping with a concurrent disease ‘hepatitis C’.
Although the reported AE ‘arthritis’ is labeled for esomeprazole
[62] and rosuvastatin [81] individually, their LR model (ROR = 0.39,
p-value = 0.001) shows no evidence of statistically significant
interaction. This finding suggests that their coadministration does
not affect the safety profile of each other.
Also, the {furosemide, metformin ? Acute renal failure} pattern
shows insignificant DIAE (ROR = 0.215). This result rejects the presence of interaction between furosemide and metformin. Thus, this
finding may help to report incompletely documented FDA-labeling
data stating that no information is available about the interaction
of metformin and furosemide when co-administered chronically
[82].
In summary, LR modeling refutes hypotheses of all ten potential
DIAE signals (as shown in Table 8) that have been extracted from

Table 8
Results of logistic regression (LR) modeling. The ‘AE’ denotes adverse event reported with the drug pair. The (S) symbol denotes support of the {drug pair – AE} rule. The exp (d) is
the exponential of interaction coefficient. The ‘ROR’ indicates the disproportionality measure ‘‘reporting odds ratio”.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Drug pair

Reported AE

(S)

exp(d)  ROR

P-value

Metoprolol, Rosuvastatin
Amlodipine, Valsartan
Sitagliptin, Metformin
Carvedilol, Furosemide
Furosemide, Metformin
Buprenorphine, Naloxone
Alprazolam, Zolpidem
Formoterol, Budesonide
Esomeprazole, Rosuvastatin
Fluticasone, Salmeterol

Diabetes mellitus
Myocardial infarction
Pancreatic carcinoma
Acute renal failure
Acute renal failure
Hepatitis C
Completed suicide
Lung neoplasm malignant
Arthritis
Neoplasm malignant

21
26
37
24
38
29
54
25
20
23

0.39
1.21
0.69
1.03
0.2
1E+007
0.06
0.67
0.39
5E+007

0.001
0.509
0.539
0.942
0.000
0.997
0.000
0.563
0.001
0.996

306

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

FAERS dataset by implementing the hybrid Apriori. Those DIAEs
have been tested for confounding between paired drugs and the
results coincide with the current knowledge in absence of interaction; i.e. the models do not provide any evidence of a positive DI.

5. Conclusion
There is a huge potential to detect DIAE signals from SRS data.
In this study, the proposed algorithm ‘‘hybrid Apriori” has been
able to extract a substantial number of DIAE association patterns.
It is based on the modification of the classic Apriori by using a disproportionality analysis ‘PRR’ as a measure of interestingness
rather than confidence due to inappropriateness of confidence to
detect rare ADRs. The novelty of this study is in using the principle
of classic Apriori as unsupervised machine learning for mining
large SRS database for the purpose of generating hypotheses for
potential DIAE rules. Then, we have used the PRR measure, adopted
by some regularity drug authorities e.g. UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), for generating potential
DIAE patterns. We have qualitatively evaluated a sample of generated DIAE rules to create a three-parted taxonomy relating the AE
to each of the drug pair in pattern. Our method has also revealed
the capability to extract rare & serious DIs. Although there is no
gold standard for evaluating the performance of Apriori-based
approaches, our method shows promising results in terms of precision, sensitivity and specificity. Furthermore, we have investigated some undocumented DIAE patterns (FP) generated by the
proposed method to assess whether they are valid or not. This
could be achieved by using LR analysis to test for confounding by
interacting drugs in order to identify whether they can be novel
DIAEs that require more investigation or not.
The contributions of this study satisfy the two main goals of
data mining; verification and discovery. They can be summarized
as follows: (1) the proposed hybrid Apriori algorithm could effectively mine DIAE patterns (#2933) in FAERS as a part of systematic
large scale database–wide mining process; (2) Procedures followed
to preprocess the dataset could minimize the proportion of spurious association patterns extracted by hybrid Apriori; (3) Quantitative/performance evaluation of the proposed algorithm could be
conducted despite the lack of DIs’ gold standard; (4) previously
unknown or incompletely documented DIAE signals could be validated using LR modeling; (5) The discovery goal has been achieved
by refutation of some unknown DIAE patterns or FP signals.
Despite the relative novelty of this study, it shows some limitations that can be summarized as follows: (1) we did not take into
consideration the method of administration of the drug (e.g., taken
orally, injected or applied externally such as ointment or ophthalmic drops). As a specific example, a corticosteroid may produce
an interaction when taken orally while having no effect when
applied to the skin or taken as an ophthalmic solution. As this
information is crucial for determining whether an interaction will
take place in clinical reality, we could not address this limitation
due to high percentage of missing information in the attribute of
the drug route in the original FAERS dataset. However, we avoided
significant number of spurious interactions by manually removing
unspecific drugs (e.g. beta-blockers), Foods, beverages and procedures (e.g. X-ray radiation). (2) similarly, duplicates of FAERS dataset with different CASE numbers could not be detected and
omitted. This may be handled in future work by developing an
algorithm that can automatically predict reports’ duplicates
through certain identifiers (e.g. demographic data) and then automatically omits them. (3) The disproportionality metric PRR
instead of confidence to filter significant DIAE patterns was unable
to correct for confounding by interacting drug. This means that if
one drug truly causes an ADR and another drug is frequently used

together with the first drug as a consequence, this frequent association will be falsely signaled as DI. This is called signal leakage. For
example, the DIAE pattern {Sitagliptin, Metformin ? pancreatic
carcinoma} has been extracted by our method, while it is not a real
DI. (4) Constraining the number of interacting drugs into only two
drugs within association patterns could not permit the detection of
DIAE signals relating to certain pharmacologic classes of drugs. (5)
We used the thresholds proposed in similar previous studies due to
the absence of a gold standard for all possible DI safety profiles of
marketed drugs. Consequently, more research is needed to evaluate the performance of various analytical methods in the context
of trade-off between sensitivity and specificity [55] and to gain
better understanding of signaling characteristics of multivariate
association measures. This will help in identifying optimal signalqualifying thresholds in purpose of titrating the threshold of the
measure toward a desired level of sensitivity and specificity and
also avoiding costs associated with false-positive and falsenegative signals.
Some aspects have been emerged for future work and optimizing PhV research. Firstly, in recognition of the major role of drug
toxicity in late-stage product attrition of drug discovery process,
early identification of the DI safety profiles of new medicines
remains challenging. There is a need for developing data mining
approaches to explore clinical safety knowledge and to derive DIs
from new drug candidates in early drug discovery via linking
across multiple disciplines; encompassing preclinical, chemical
structures, toxicology, drug metabolism, in vitro pharmacology
and clinical safety information [83–86]. It is thought that this will
add values via providing a way to link clinical safety information to
the experimental platforms resulting in efficient triage of new drug
candidates for further testing and elaboration [87]. Secondly,
owing to the passiveness of SRSs suffering relative rarity of reporting DIs, linking diverse data sources (e.g. biomedical literature,
patient social media, etc.) presents new opportunities allowing
for active paradigms of DI surveillance which have not traditionally
been used in post marketing PhV.
In summary, we cannot claim that our method seems superior
to previous studies due to heterogeneity in data sources or implementation choices, such as threshold selection and the triage logic
for signals investigation. Also the absence of common datasets
which can be utilized for performing comparative evaluations
among various methods should be considered.
Last but not least, Data mining does not provide sufficient evidence on causality and it is just an adjunctive tool to formulate
or strengthen or refine novel hypotheses. In other words, wellorganized clinical reviews remain crucial for further investigation
and close surveillance of such safety signals and data mining
approaches should be incorporated into an overall signaling strategy as a first step in a more comprehensive process.
Author contributions
HI, AS, AA and ASD conceived the study. HI performed the
experiment and wrote the manuscript. HI and AS analyzed the
results. HI and AS provided additional resource of documented
DIs. AS, AA and ASD drafted and revised the manuscript.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the public availability of FDA spontaneous reporting data through ASCII format and public availability

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308

of UMLS-Metathesaurus maintained by U.S. National Library of
Medicine.
We would like to thank Dr. Nader Elshehabi for his precious
help in mapping drug names to generics by using scripts to load
the UMLS metathesaurus from MySQL into SQL server. Also, we
express thanks to the clinical experts Dr. Hadir Rostom and Dr.
Noha Khalifa for double checking the qualitative evaluation of DIAE
results. We would like to acknowledge Prof. Hanaa Alam Eldin for
editing the manuscript.

References
[1] I.R. Edwards, J.K. Aronson, Adverse drug reactions: definitions, diagnosis and
management, Lancet 356 (2000) 1255–1259.
[2] C.G. Hartford, K.S. Petchel, H. Mickail, S. Perez-Gutthann, M. McHale, J.M.
Grana, P. Marquez, Pharmacovigilance during the pre-aPRR oval phases: an
evolving pharmaceutical industry model in response to ICH E2E, CIOMS VI,
FDA and EMEA/CHMP risk-management guidelines, Drug Saf. 29 (8) (2006)
657–673.
[3] N.R. Crowther, A.M. Holbrook, R. Kenwright, M. Kenwright, Drug interactions
among commonly used medications. Chart simplifies data from critical
literature review, Can. Fam. Physician 43 (1997) 1972-6–1979-81.
[4] S.F. Manzi, M. Shannon, Drug interactions—a review, Clin. Pediatr. Emergency
Med. 5 (2005) 93–102.
[5] V. Khouri, S.H. Semnani, G.H. Roushandel, Frequency distribution of drug
interactions and some of related factors in prescriptions, Med. J. Tabriz Univ.
Med. Sci. 27 (2006) 29–32.
[6] D. Pirmohamed, M.L. Orrne, Drug interactions of clinical importance, in: D.
Davies et al. (Eds.), Davies’s Textbook of adverse Drug Reactions. London,
Chapman & Hall Medical, London, 1998, pp. 888–912.
[7] P.G. Van der Heijden, E.P. van Puijenbroek, S. van Buuren, J.W. van der
Hofstede, On the assessment of adverse drug reactions from spontaneous
reporting systems: the influence of underreporting on odds ratios, Stat. Med.
21 (14) (2002) 2027e44.
[8] E.L. Olvey, S. Clauschee, D.C. Malone, Comparison of critical drug–drug
interaction listings: the Department of Veterans Affairs medical system and
standard reference compendia, Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 87 (1) (2010) 48e51.
[9] G. Norén, R. Sundberg, A. Bate, A statistical methodology for drug–drug
interaction surveillance, Stat. Med. 27 (2008) 3057–3070.
[10] M.D. Rawlins, Spontaneous reporting of adverse drug reactions. II. Uses, Br. J.
Clin. Pharmacol. 26 (1988) 7–11.
[11] Peter H. Bui, Arnulfo Quesada, Adrian Handforth, Oliver Hankinson, The
mibefradil derivative NNC55-0396, a specific T-type calcium channel
antagonist, exhibits less CYP3A4 inhibition than mibefradil, Drug Metab.
Dispos. 36 (7) (2008) 1291–1299.
[12] T. Meinertz, Mibefradil – a drug which may enhance the propensity for the
development of abnormal QT prolongation, Eur. Heart J. (Suppl. 3) (2001) K89–
K92.
[13] Egyptian Pharmaceutical Vigilance Center (EPVC), 2014. Available from URL:
<http://epvc.gov.eg.allium.arvixe.com>.
[14] K. Diane, L.S. Wysowski, Adverse drug event surveillance and drug
withdrawals in the United States, 1969–2002, Arch. Intern. Med. 165 (2005)
1363–1369.
[15] U.S. Food and Drug Administration, FAERS quarterly data files; available from
URL: <http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatory>.
[16] U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Guidances of ICH E2B. Available
from URL: <http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances>.
[17] P.J. Wiffen, et al. Adverse drug reactions in hospital patients: a systematic
review of the prospective and retrospective studies. Bandolier Extra 2002,
<www/jr2.ox.ac.uk/bandolier/extra.html>.
[18] E. Ramirez, A.J. Carcas, A.M. Borobia, et al., A pharmacovigilance program from
laboratory signals for the detection and reporting of serious adverse drug
reactions in hospitalized patients, Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 87 (1) (2010) 74–86.
[19] E.P. Van Puijenbroek, A.C. Egberts, E.R. Heerdink, H.G. Leufkens, Detecting
drug–drug interactions using a database for spontaneous adverse drug
reactions: an example with diuretics and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs, Eur. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 56 (9–10) (2000) 733–738.
[20] E.P. Van Puijenbroek, A.C. Egberts, R.H. Meyboom, H.G. Leufkens, Signalling
possible drug–drug interactions in a spontaneous reporting system: delay of
withdrawal bleeding during concomitant use of oral contraceptives and
itraconazole, Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 47 (6) (1999) 689–693.
[21] G.N. Norén, R. Sundberg, A. Bate, I.R. Edwards, A statistical methodology for
drug–drug interaction surveillance, Stat. Med. 27 (16) (2008) 3057–3070;
B.T. Thakrar, S.B. Grundschober, L. Doessegger, Detecting signals of drug–drug
interactions in a spontaneous reports database, Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 64 (4)
(2007) 489–495.
[22] R. Harpaz, K. Haerian, H.S. Chase, C. Friedman, Statistical mining of potential
drug interaction adverse effects in FDA’s spontaneous reporting system, Proc.
AMIA Annu. Symp. (2010) 281–285.
[23] N.P. Tatonetti, G.H. Fernald, R.B. Altman, A novel signal detection algorithm for
identifying hidden drug–drug interactions in adverse event reports, J. Am.
Med. Inform. Assoc. 19 (1) (2012) 79–85.

307

[24] S.V. Iyer, R. Harpaz, P. LePendu, A. Bauer-Mehren, N.H. Shah, Mining clinical
text for signals of adverse drug–drug interactions, J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc.
21 (2) (2014) 353–362.
[25] C.C. Yang, L. Jiang, H. Yang, X. Tang, Detecting Signals of Adverse Drug
Reactions from Health Consumer Contributed Content in Social Media, in:
Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Health Informatics, Beijing, August
12, 2012.
[26] C.C. Yang, H. Yang, L. Jiang, M. Zhang, Social media mining for drug safety
signal detection, in: Proceedings of ACM CIKM International Workshop on
Smart Health and Wellbeing, Maui, Hawaii, 2012, pp. 33–40.
[27] C.C. Yang, H. Yang, L. Jiang, Postmarketing drug safety surveillance using
publicly available health consumer contributed content in social media, ACM
Transact. Manage. Inform. Syst. (TMIS) 5 (1) (2014) 2–21.
[28] H. Yang, C.C. Yang, Harnessing social media for drug–drug interactions
detection, in: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Healthcare
Informatics, Philadelphia, PA, 2013, pp. 22–29.
[29] M. Hauben, A. Bate, Decision support methods for the detection of adverse
events in post-marketing data, Drug Discov. Today 14 (7–8) (2009) 343–357.
[30] Medical Dictionary for Regularity Activities (MedDRA), Available from URL:
<www.meddramsso.com>.
[31] International Conference on Harmonisation, ICH E2b template, Available from
URL:
<http://www.ich.org/products/guidelines/efficacy/article/efficacyguidelines.html> (last accessed 2015 March).
[32] A.T. McCray, A.R. Aronson, A.C. Browne, T.C. Rindflesch, A. Razi, S. Srinivasan,
UMLS knowledge for biomedical language processing, Bull. Med. Libr. Assoc.
81 (2) (1993) 184–194.
[33] J.N. Stuart, Z. Kelly, K. John, P. Tammy, M. Robin, Normalized names for clinical
drugs: RxNorm at 6 years, J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 18 (4) (2011) 441–448.
[34] U.S. National Library of Medicine, UMLSÒ Reference Manual, Available from
URL: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK9685/>.
[35] Drugs.com website, Drugs.com Interactions Checker, Available from URL:
<http://www.drugs.com/drug_interactions.php>.
[36] DrugBank website, Available from URL: <http://www.drugbank.ca/>.
[37] I. Segura-Bedmar, P. Martinez, C. De Pablo-Sánchez, Combining syntactic
information and domain-specific lexical patterns to extract drug–drug
interactions from biomedical texts, in: Proceedings of the ACM Fourth
International Workshop on Data and Text Mining in Biomedical Informatics
(DTMBIO’10), 2010, pp. 49–56.
[38] Epocrates RX, Available from URL: <http://www.epocrates.com/products>.
[39] Physician Desk Reference (PDR), Available from URL: <http://www.pdr.net/
browse-by-drug-name>.
[40] Medicines Complete website, Available from URL: <https://www.
medicinescomplete.com>.
[41] e-Therapeutics, Available from URL: <http://www.e-therapeutics.ca/>.
[42] Medscape, Available from URL: <http://reference.medscape.com/>.
[43] U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Drugs@FDA, Available from URL:
<http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/drugsatfda/>.
[44] A.L. Matthew, K. Marina, M.D. Ankur, L.R. David, Extraction and Mapping of
Drug Names from Free Text to a Standardized Nomenclature. AMIA Annu.
Symp. Proc. 2007, 2007, pp. 438–442.
[45] R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski, A. Swami, Mining association rules between sets of
items in large databases, in: Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International
Conference on Management of Data, 1993, pp. 207–216.
[46] S. Sarawagi, S. Thomas, R. Agrawal, Integrating association rule mining with
relational database systems: alternatives and implications, Data Min.
Knowledge Discov. 4 (2) (2000) 89–125.
[47] L. Dingcheng, S. Gyorgy, G.C. Christopher, P. Jyotishman, Using Association
Rule Mining for Phenotype Extraction from Electronic Health Records. AMIA Jt.
Summits Transl. Sci. Proc. 2013, 2013, pp. 142–146.
[48] E.B. Stephen, P.S. Alan, H. Michael, B. Ken, T.J. Warren, A.M. Stephen,
Association rules and data mining in hospital infection control and public
health surveillance, J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 5 (4) (1998) 373–381.
[49] M.H. Kuo, A.W. Kushniruk, E.M. Borycki, D. Greig, Application of the Apriori
algorithm for adverse drug reaction detection, Stud. Health Technol. Inform.
148 (2009) 95–101.
[50] R. Srikant, Q. Vu, R. Agrawal, Mining Association Rules with Item Constraints,
in: Proceedings of the KDD 97, 1997, pp. 67–73.
[51] S.J.V. Evans, P.C. Waller, S. Davis, Use of proportional reporting ratios (PRRs) for
signal generation from spontaneous adverse drug reaction reports,
Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 10 (2001) 483–486.
[52] R. Parikh, A. Mathai, S. Parikh, G.C. Sekhar, R. Thomas, Understanding and
using sensitivity, specificity and predictive values, Indian J. Ophthalmol. 56 (1)
(2008) 45–50.
[53] P.D. Stein, R.D. Hull, K.C. Patel, et al., D-dimer for the exclusion of acute venous
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism: a systematic review, Ann. Intern. Med.
140 (8) (2004) 589–602.
[54] H. Yang, C.C. Yang, Drug–drug interactions detection from online
heterogeneous healthcare network, in: Proceedings of IEEE International
Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI), VR, Italy, 2014, pp. 7–16.
[55] R. Harpaz, W. DuMouchel, P. LePendu, A. Bauer-Mehren, P. Ryan, N.H. Shah,
Performance of pharmacovigilance signal-detection algorithms for the FDA
adverse event reporting system, Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 93 (6) (2013) 539–546.
[56] K.J. Jager, C. Zoccali, A. Macleod, F.W. Dekker, Confounding: what is it and how
do we deal with it?, Kidney Int 73 (3) (2008) 256–260.
[57] G.N. Noren, A. Bate, R. Orre, I.R. Edwards, Extending the methods used to
screen the WHO drug safety database towards analysis of complex

308

[58]
[59]
[60]

[61]
[62]
[63]
[64]
[65]

[66]
[67]
[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]
[72]

H. Ibrahim et al. / Journal of Biomedical Informatics 60 (2016) 294–308
associations and improved accuracy for rare events, Stat. Med. 25 (21) (2006)
3740–3757.
J. Hopstadius, G.N. Norén, A. Bate, I.R. Edwards, Impact of stratification on
adverse drug reaction surveillance, Drug Saf. 31 (11) (2008) 1035–1048.
P. Jewell Nicholas, Statistics for Epidemiology. Texts for Statistical Sciences,
Hardcover ed., Chapman and Hall, 2004.
I. Schillevoort, E.P. van Puijenbroek, A. de Boer, R.A. Roos, P.A. Jansen, H.G.
Leufkens, Extrapyramidal syndromes associated with selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors: a case-control study using spontaneous reports, Int.
Clin. Psychopharmacol. 17 (2) (2002) 75–79.
J.D. Lalau, Lactic acidosis induced by metformin, Drug Saf. 33 (9) (2010) 727–
740.
Esomeprazole APRR OVAL FDA LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 2001, Available from URL:
<http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2015>.
Formoterol APRR OVAL FDA LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 2001, Available from URL:
<http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2012>.
D.W. Aaronson, The ‘‘black box” warning and allergy drugs, J. Allergy Clin.
Immunol. 117 (1) (2006) 40–44.
K. Alisa, K. Anita, J. Elmir, R. Zijah, K. Goran, Influence of remifentanil/propofol
anesthesia on ventilator-associated pneumonia occurrence after major cardiac
surgery, Med Arch 67 (6) (2013) 407–409.
Entacapone APRR OVAL FDA LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 1999, Available from URL:
<http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2015>.
Plavix APRR OVAL LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 1997, Available from URL: <http://
www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2013>.
A. Palumbo, S.V. Rajkumar, M.A. Dimopoulos, et al., Prevention of thalidomideand lenalidomide-associated thrombosis in myeloma, Leukemia 22 (2) (2008)
414–423.
S.P. Menon, S.V. Rajkumar, M. Lacy, P. Falco, A. Palumbo, Thromboembolic
events with lenalidomide-based therapy for multiple myeloma, Cancer 112 (7)
(2008) 1522–1528.
S. Shahabudin, C. Bharti, P. Faizal, Surveillance of the potential drug–drug
interactions in the medicine department of a tertiary care hospital, J. Clin.
Diagn. Res. 6 (7) (2012) 1258–1261.
YAZ APRR OVAL LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 2006, Available from URL: <http://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2015>.
Mycophenolate APRR OVAL LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 1995, Available from URL:
<http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2013>.

[73] Tacrolimus APRR OVAL LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 2009, Available from URL: <http://
www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2009>.
[74] L.G. Claeys, W. Berg, Major bleeding and severe thrombocytopenia after
combined heparin and abciximab-c7E3 Fab therapy, Eur. J. Vasc. Endovasc.
Surg. 25 (1) (2003) 85–87.
[75] Abciximab APRR OVAL LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 1993, <http://www.accessdata.
fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2013>.
[76] SymbicortÒAPRR OVAL LABEL, 2006, Available from URL: <http://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2010>.
[77] Abacavir APRR OVAL LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 1998, Available from: <http://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2015>.
[78] Ritonavir APRR OVAL LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 1996, Available from: <http://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2015>.
[79] D.K. Andersen et al., PANCREATITIS – DIABETES – PANCREATIC CANCER:
summary of an NIDDK-NCI workshop, Pancreas 42 (8) (2013) 10.
[80] Suboxone APRR OVAL LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 2002, Available from URL: <http://
www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2014>.
[81] Rosuvastatin APRR OVAL LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 2003, Available from: <http://
www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label>.
[82] Metformin APRR OVAL LABEL, Drugs@FDA, 2002, Available from URL: <http://
www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2014>.
[83] S. Vilar, R. Harpaz, H.S. Chase, et al., Facilitating adverse drug event detection
pharmacovigilance databases using molecular structure similarity: application
rhabdomyolysis, J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 18 (Suppl. 1) (2011). i73–e80.
[84] D.S. Wishart et al., DrugBank: a knowledgebase for drugs, drug actions and
drug targets, Nucl. Acids Res. 36 (Database issue) (2008) D901–D906.
[85] T.D. Bjornsson, J.T. Callaghan, H.J. Einolf, V. Fischer, L. Gan, et al., The conduct of
in vitro and in vivo drug–drug interaction studies: a Pharmaceutical Research
and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA) perspective, Drug Metab. Dispos. 31
(7) (2003) 815–832.
[86] N. Greene, P.N. Judsona, J.J. Langowskia, C.A. Marchanta, Knowledge-based
expert systems for toxicity and metabolism prediction: DEREK, StAR and
METEOR. SAR & QSAR, Environ. Res. 10 (2–3) (1999) 299–313.
[87] V.K. Gomba, K. Enslein, B.W. Blake, Assessment of developmental toxicity
potential of chemicals by quantitative structure–toxicity relationship models,
Chemosphere 31 (1) (1995) 2499–2510.

