GOUT

Cardiovascular thromboembolic events associated
with febuxostat: Investigation of cases from the FDA
adverse event reporting system database
Pranav K. Gandhi, William M. Gentry, and Michael B. Bottorff

Objective: Uloric (Febuxostat) has been linked with cardiovascular thromboembolic events in gout
patients. However, no post-marketing data analysis has investigated these drug-associated adverse event
reports. The study objective was to identify febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic event
reports in the US using the Food and Drug Administration adverse event reporting system (AERS)
database.
Methods: Reports listing uloric and febuxostat as the suspect drug and cardiovascular
thromboembolic events (combined in a single term based on adverse event reports of myocardial
infarction, stroke, among others) as the adverse event were extracted from the drug’s approval date
through the fourth quarter of 2011. Bayesian statistics within the neural network architecture was
implemented to identify potential signals of febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic
events. A potential signal for the drug-adverse event combination reports is generated when the
lower limit of the 95% two-sided confidence interval of the information component (IC), denoted
by IC025 is greater than zero.
Results: Twenty-one combination reports of febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic
events were identified in gout patients in the US. The mean age of combination cases was 64 years.
Potential signals (IC025 ¼ 4.09) was generated for combination reports of febuxostat-associated
cardiovascular thromboembolic events.
Conclusion: AERS indicated potential signals of febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic events. AERS is not capable of establishing the causal link and detecting the true frequency of
an adverse event associated with a drug. The positive IC value found in this study merits continued
surveillance and assessment of cardiovascular thromboembolic events associated with Febuxostat.
& 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Semin Arthritis Rheum 42:562–566
Keywords: Febuxostat, Cardiovascular thromboembolic events, Gout, Food and Drug Administration,
Adverse event reporting system database

F

ebuxostat, a non-purine, selective xanthine oxidase
inhibitor was approved in 2009 by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of
hyperuricemia in patients with gout [1]. The efficacy of
febuxostat was based upon phase II, phase III, and
long-term, open-label extension studies [2–5]. In the
phase III and long-term, open-label extension studies, a
higher incidence of cardiovascular thromboembolic
events (composite of cardiovascular death, nonfatal
myocardial infarction, and nonfatal stroke) as defined
Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy, South College, Knoxville, TN.
Address reprint requests to Pranav K. Gandhi, Department of Pharmacy Practice,
South College School of Pharmacy, 400 Goodys Lane, Knoxville, TN 37919. E-mail:
pgandhi@southcollegetn.edu.

562

by the Antiplatelet Trialists Collaboration events was
reported with febuxostat than with allopurinol [6,7].
The difference between groups was not statistically
significant. To date, no post-marketing data analysis has
investigated febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic events over a period of time. The study
objective was to identify potential cases of febuxostatassociated cardiovascular thromboembolic events in the
US using the FDA adverse event reporting system (AERS)
database. Bayesian statistics within the neural network
architecture (BCPNN) was implemented to quantitatively assess potential signals of cardiovascular thromboembolic events associated with the use of febuxostat in
gout patients.

0049-0172/12/$ - see front matter & 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2012.11.002

P.K. Gandhi et al.

METHODS
Adverse event dataset
AERS is a spontaneous reporting database which consists
of adverse event and medication error reports of approved
drugs and therapeutic biological products submitted to
the FDA. These reports can be submitted via mandatory
reporting guidelines for the pharmaceutical companies
and voluntarily reports by health care professionals and
consumers [8]. Information from AERS includes demographic information; drug information from the case
reports; reaction information; patient outcome information; drug therapy start dates and the end dates; adverse
events coded and reviewed in accordance with medical
dictionary for regulatory activity (MedDRA) preferred
terms (PTs); indications for use (diagnoses) for the
reported drugs and information on the source of the
reports, among others.
The initial process involved extraction of unique
reports from AERS database with duplicate reports and
drug redundancies removed to eliminate repetition and
enhance accuracy. Initial and follow-up reports with
identical primary linked identification number were
taken as a unique patient case report. In the event
multiple reports with a common case number were
identified, only the safety report with the most recent
date was used. Reports occurring in foreign countries
were excluded. This was done not only to focus on US
reports but also to remove variation caused by FDA
requirements for foreign reporting and different national
systems for post-marketing surveillance data.
Adverse event and drug terms
Individual case reports were identified when their
reported adverse events were comparable to the selected
MedDRA PTs available from the AERS database
(Table 1). The individual PTs presented in Table 1 were
combined into a single term representing “cardiovascular
thromboembolic events.” The combination of adverse
events into a single term was done to better inform and
educate the patients and health care professionals regarding the disease condition and potential adverse events
associated with the specific drug. Reports of arbitrary
drug names, including trade names and abbreviations are
available from AERS. Reports listing uloric and febuxostat as the suspect drug were extracted from the AERS
database.
BCPNN methodology
Data mining algorithms (DMAs) have been applied to
identify potential signals of safety problems for specific
drug-adverse event combination reports reported to the
FDA AERS [9,10]. DMAs highlight potential signals of
specific drug-associated adverse events that are reported
more frequently than expected in the database. One such
procedure, BCPNN, has been applied in several studies to

563
Table 1 Cardiovascular Thromboembolic-related PTs From
FDA AERS Used in This Study
PTs
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

Deep vein thrombosis
Pulmonary embolism
Renal vein thrombosis
Renal artery thrombosis
Stroke
Jugular vein thrombosis
Transient ischaemic attack
Venous thrombosis
Thromboembolism
Arterial thrombosis
Inflammatory or infiltrative cardiomyopathy
Congestive cardiomyopathy
Post-procedural myocardial infarction
Arterial occlusive disease
Acute myocardial infarction
Myocardial ischaemia
Cardiomyopathy
Ischaemic cerebral infarction
Peripheral embolism
Peripheral arterial embolism
Unstable angina
Coronary thrombosis
Fatal myocardial infarction
Non-fatal myocardial infarction
Myocardial infarction
Embolic stroke
Intracardiac thrombosis
Cardiac thrombus
Coronary artery occlusion
Ischaemic stroke
Resuscitated cardiac arrest

highlight potential signals of drug-associated adverse
events [9,10]. BCPNN examines the association between
the drug and adverse event using a measure of disproportionality called the Information Component (IC)
[9,10]. Parameters including the number of unique drug
reports, specific adverse event, specific drug-adverse event
combination reports, and the total number of reports in
the database are used to estimate the IC value. A Dirichlet
prior distribution is applied to the said parameters that
enable closed-form expressions for the posterior distributions and associated posterior intervals [9,10].
BCPNN allows the calculation of both the point
estimate (IC) and its 95% confidence interval (CI) to
be calculated for the drug-adverse event combination
reports. Positive IC values indicate that there is a greater
likelihood that the combination of drug-associated
adverse events was reported more often in the database
than statistically expected in the database [10].
The higher the IC value, the more likely it is that the
drug-adverse event combination reports are reported
more than statistically expected in the database [10]. An
IC value of zero indicates lack of quantitative association
between the drug and the adverse event [10]. Whereas,

564

Febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic events

negative IC values indicates that the drug-associated
adverse event combination cases are reported less than
statistically expected in the database [10]. A potential
‘signal’ or ‘association’ for the combination reports of
drug-associated adverse event is identified when the lower
limit of a two-sided 95% CI of the IC, denoted by IC025
exceeds zero [9,10]. We chose to define the signal as
‘potential’ because the extracted combination cases
require additional case-by-case clinical investigation.
A retrospective data mining analysis was applied to the
FDA AERS database for febuxostat from its FDA
approval date in the US (February 16, 2009) through
the fourth quarter of 2011, since at the time when this
study was conducted, data after the fourth quarter of
2011 were not available.
RESULTS
A total of 990,948 unduplicated US reports were
identified since the drug’s approval date through the
fourth quarter of 2011. Eighty-six gout patients in the US
treated with febuxostat/uloric were identified in AERS. A
total of 3460 unduplicated US reports concerning
cardiovascular thromboembolic events were extracted
from the AERS database. The search to identify reports
of febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic
events (Table 2) generated 21 combination reports.
Other adverse events (i.e., besides cardiovascular thromboembolic events) associated with febuxostat reported in

gout patients were acute renal failure (n ¼ 6), condition
aggravated (n ¼ 5), dehydration (n ¼ 5), nausea (n ¼ 5),
and haemoglobin decreased (n ¼ 5), among others. A
detailed list of other adverse events (frequency r 4)
reported in patients using febuxostat is available on
request.
The mean age of combination reports of febuxostatassociated cardiovascular thromboembolic events was 64
years (Table 2). The outcome for each patient was
reported in all 21 combination cases where Z1 outcome
can be reported for each case report. Among 21
combination reports extracted from AERS, hospitalisation was reported as the outcome in 14 patients, life
threatening was reported in three patients, required
intervention to prevent permanent impairment/damage,
others, and death were reported in eight combination
reports (Table 2).
Based on IC and IC025 4 0 values generated using
BCPNN technique, potential signals were identified for the
combination cases of febuxostat-associated cardiovascular
thromboembolic events. The BCPNN approach generated
IC (IC025) ¼ 4.75 (4.09) for the febuxostat-associated
cardiovascular thromboembolic combination reports.
The lower limit of the two-sided 95% CI was greater than
0, indicating an association between febuxostat and the
occurrence of cardiovascular thromboembolic events. Positive values indicate that the particular combination of
febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic events
was reported to the database more often than statistically

Table 2 Characteristics of the 21 Combination Cases of Febuxostat-Associated Cardiovascular Thromboembolic Events
Extracted From FDA AERS
Age (years), Sex

Specific Cardiovascular Thromboembolic Event Reported

Outcome Reporteda

91, M
69, F
80, F
66, M
48, M
No age reported, F
7, M
72, M
56, F
84, M
70, M
71, M
68, F
39, M
59, M
No age and sex reported
64, F
61, M
83, M
No age and sex reported
64, M

Myocardial infarction
Myocardial infarction
Cardiac arrest, myocardial infarction, coronary artery occlusion
Myocardial infarction
Congestive cardiomyopathy
Myocardial infarction
Deep vein thrombosis
Pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis
Pulmonary embolism
Post procedural myocardial infarction, arterial occlusive disease
Acute myocardial infarction
Pulmonary embolism
Pulmonary embolism
Pulmonary embolism
Pulmonary embolism
Myocardial infarction
Myocardial ischaemia, pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis
Ischaemic cerebral infarction
Myocardial infarction
Cardiomyopathy
Myocardial infarction

DE, HO
HO, OT
DE
DE
DE
DE
OT, RI, LT, HO
HO
HO
DE, LT, OT, RI
HO, RI, OT
HO
DE, HO
HO, RI, LT, OT
HO
DE
HO
HO, RI
HO, OT, RI
OT, RI
HO, RI, OT

DE: death; HO: hospitalisation—initial or prolonged; OT: other serious outcome; RI: required intervention to prevent permanent impairment/
damage; LT: life-threatening.
a
A case may report more than one outcome.

P.K. Gandhi et al.

expected from reports available in the database. In other
words, the certainty of a positive association between
febuxostat and cardiovascular thromboembolic events was
highlighted based on the positive values of the lower limit of
the 95% CI of the IC.
DISCUSSION
This retrospective data mining analysis identified 21
combination reports of febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic events in the US. BCPNN analysis
generated potential signals as evidenced by the lower limit
of the 95% two-sided CI of the IC greater than 0
(IC025 ¼ 4.09) indicating that the particular combination
of febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic
events were reported to the AERS database more
frequently than statistically expected in the database.
Our results are corroborated with findings from both the
Phase III randomized double-blind trials and long-term
extension studies where gout patients treated with
febuxostat were compared to allopurinol-treated patients
[2–5]. These studies reported higher number of cardiovascular side-effects (defined by the APTC events) in
patients treated with febuxostat compared to allopurinol;
however, the difference between the two treatments was
not statistically significant [2–5]. Moreover, the patients
experiencing a cardiovascular event had previous medical
history of a cardiovascular disease and/or had underlying
risk factors for cardiovascular diseases [2–5,7]. Nevertheless, considering the serious risks of febuxostatassociated cardiovascular thromboembolic events identified in both the double-blind trials and long-term
extension studies and potential signals found in the
present study, continued surveillance is recommended.
Future long-term pharmacoepidemiologic studies should
examine the plausibility of cardiovascular thromboembolic events in association with febuxostat in gout
patients.
The positive IC value found in this study merits
continued investigation and evaluation of cardiovascular
thromboembolic events associated with the use of febuxostat in gout patients. However, it should be noted that
positive IC values for the febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic events do not establish causal link
between the investigated drug and specific adverse event.
On the other hand, lower IC values for the drug-adverse
event combination reports in AERS do not suggest that
the adverse event is not associated with the drug of
interest. Instead, lower IC values may be due to the lower
number of drug-adverse event combination reports in
AERS. An increased probability of reporting specific
adverse events especially following the advent of a new
drug can limit the detection of the true frequency of
adverse events associated with the particular drug [11].
The identification of cardiovascular thromboembolic
events in patients treated with febuxostat may be related
to the underlying disease condition or the administration

565

of concurrent drugs. Patients with gout have an increased
risk of developing cardiovascular or metabolic disorders
[7]. Few studies note the association between gout and
cardiovascular events [7,12], whereas others have found
hyperuricaemia to increase the risk of cardiovascular
diseases and metabolic syndrome risk [7,13,14].
The identification of combination reports of
febuxostat-associated thromboembolic events should be
substantiated with case-by-case analysis or additional data
mining studies. The application of BCPNN in this study
was used solely for hypothesis generation and identification of potential signals and not to draw final conclusions
regarding febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic events. BCPNN is an effective tool when
investigating potential signals of specific drug-associated
adverse events [9,10]. The application of BCPNN
technique to identify o4 drug-adverse event combination reports have been questioned; however, it seldom
influences the IC analysis when investigating the particular drug and its association with the adverse event [10].
Several studies report the application of BCPNN to
generate signals by identifying potential associations
between the investigated drug and adverse event [9–
11,15]. As previously noted [9], in spontaneous reporting
systems, a small number of combination reports may
demonstrate a signal for the drug-associated adverse
events. Nonetheless, a substantial number of combination reports (n ¼ 21) and a high positive value (IC025 ¼
4.09) found in our study provide credible evidence of a
potential association between febuxostat and the occurrence of cardiovascular thromboembolic events.
Notwithstanding the limitations and biases innate to
spontaneously reported datasets such as AERS [16], the
application of BCPNN in this study provides credibility to
the possible association between febuxostat and cardiovascular thromboembolic events. Moreover, consistent with the
International Society of Pharmacovigilance and International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology guidelines [17],
our study reports available information from AERS suggesting potential signals of febuxostat-associated cardiovascular
thromboembolic events. The identification of cardiovascular
thromboembolic events associated with the use of febuxostat
in gout patients may have implications for how this disease
condition and the use of febuxostat should be discussed in
this patient group. Until further evidence establishing a
causal link between the use of febuxostat and cardiovascular
thromboembolic
events, health care professionals and patients need to be
educated regarding the potential association of cardiovascular thromboembolic events associated with use of febuxostat.
CONCLUSIONS
The identification of febuxostat-associated cardiovascular
thromboembolic events from the FDA AERS database in
this study indicates continuing combination cases of
cardiovascular thrombotic events associated with the use

566

of febuxostat in gout patients. AERS does not identify the
true frequency of an adverse event associated with a
particular drug nor does it demonstrate the causal
relationship between the drug and adverse event. However, the identification of potential signals in this study
warrants future pharmacoepidemiologic studies to investigate the association between febuxostat and cardiovascular thromboembolic events in gout patients in the US.

Febuxostat-associated cardiovascular thromboembolic events

[7]
[8]
[9]

REFERENCES
[1] Uloric prescribing information. Dearfield IL: Takeda Pharmaceuticals North America, Inc.; 2009.
[2] Becker MA, Schumacher HR, Jr, Wortmann RL, MacDonald
PA, Eustace D, Palo WA, et al. Febuxostat compared with
allopurinol in patients with hyperuricemia and gout. N Engl J
Med 2005;353(23):2450-61.
[3] Schumacher HR, Jr, Becker MA, Wortmann RL, Macdonald
PA, Hunt B, Streit J, et al. Effects of febuxostat versus allopurinol
and placebo in reducing serum urate in subjects with hyperuricemia and gout: a 28-week, phase III, randomized, doubleblind,
parallel-group trial. Arthritis Rheum 2008;59(11):1540-8.
[4] Wortmann RL, Becker MA, Schumacher HR. Effect of febuxostat or allopurinol on the clinical manifestations of gout:
reduction in gout flares and tophus size over time in the EXCEL
trial. Abstract presented at the American College of Rheumatology/Association of Rheumatology Health Professionals (ACR/
ARHP) Annual Scientific Meeting. Washington, DC, USA, 10–
15 November 2006. [Abstract no. 1592].
[5] Becker M, Schumacher H, MacDonald PA. Urate-lowering
therapy in subjects with gout: interim results from the febuxostat
comparative extension long-term study (EXCEL). Abstract
presented at the Annual European Congress of Rheumatology
(EULAR). Barcelona, Spain, 13–16 June 2007. [Abstract no.
THU0339].
[6] Collaborative overview of randomized trials of antiplatelet
therapy—I: Prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

stroke by prolonged antiplatelet therapy in various categories of
patients. Antiplatelet Trialists’ Collaboration. Brit Med J
1994;308(6921):81-106.
Edwards NL. Febuxostat: a new treatment for hyperuricaemia in gout. Rheumatology 2009;48(Suppl 2):
ii15-ii19, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kep088.
Piccinni C, Marchesini G, Motola G, Poluzzi E. Assessing the
association of pioglitazone use and bladder cancer through drug
adverse event reporting. Diabetes Care 2011;34(6):1369-71.
van Puijenbroek EP, Bate A, Leufkens HGM, Lidquist M, Orre
R, Egberts ACG. A comparison of measures of disproportionality
for signal detection in spontaneous reporting systems for adverse
drug reactions. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2002;11(1):3-10.
Noren GN, Bate A, Orre R, Edwards IR. Extending the methods
used to screen the WHO drug safety database towards analysis of
complex associations and improved accuracy for rare events. Stat
Med 2006;25(21):3740-57.
Ratcliffe S, Younus M, Hauben M, Reich L. Antidepressants that
inhibit neuronal norepinephrine reuptake are not associated with
increased spontaneous reporting of cardiomyopathy. J Psychopharmacol 2010;24:503-11.
Krishnan E, Svendsen K, Neaton JD, Grandits G, Kuller LH.
MRFIT Research Group. Long-term cardiovascular mortality
among middle-aged men with gout. Arch Intern Med
2008;168(10):1104-10.
Gagliardi AC, Miname MH, Santos RD. Uric acid: a marker of
increased cardiovascular risk. Atherosclerosis 2009;202(1):11-7.
Puig JG, Martinez MA. Hyperuricemia, gout and the metabolic
syndrome. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2008;20(2):187-91.
Bate A, Lindquist M, Edwards IR, Olsson S, Orre R, Lansner A,
et al. A Bayesian neural network method for adverse drug reaction
signal generation. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1998;54(4):315-21.
Hauben M, Reich L, Gerrits CM. Reports of hyperkalemia after
publication of RALES—a pharmacovigilance study. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2006;15(11):775-83.
Kelly WN, Arellano FM, Barnes J, Bergman U, Edwards RI,
Fernandez AM, et al. Guidelines for submitting adverse event
reports for publication. Drug Saf 2007;30(5):367-73.

