International Journal of Medical Informatics 104 (2017) 120–125

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

International Journal of Medical Informatics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijmedinf

Technical Notes

Integrating natural language processing expertise with patient safety event
review committees to improve the analysis of medication events

MARK

⁎

Allan Fonga, , Nicole Harriottb, Donna M. Waltersb, Hanan Foleyb, Richard Morrisseyb,
Raj R. Ratwania,c
a
b
c

National Center for Human Factors in Healthcare, MedStar Health, 3007 Tilden St. NW, Suite 7M, Washington, D.C. 20008, USA
Georgetown University Medical Center, 3800 Reservoir Rd NW, Washington, D.C. 20007, USA
Department of Emergency Medicine, Georgetown University School of Medicine, 3900 Reservoir Rd. NW Washington D.C. 20007, USA

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Patient safety events
Natural language processing
Medication
Machine learning
Visualization

Objectives: Many healthcare providers have implemented patient safety event reporting systems to better
understand and improve patient safety. Reviewing and analyzing these reports is often time consuming and
resource intensive because of both the quantity of reports and length of free-text descriptions in the reports.
Methods: Natural language processing (NLP) experts collaborated with clinical experts on a patient safety
committee to assist in the identiﬁcation and analysis of medication related patient safety events. Diﬀerent NLP
algorithmic approaches were developed to identify four types of medication related patient safety events and the
models were compared.
Results: Well performing NLP models were generated to categorize medication related events into pharmacy
delivery delays, dispensing errors, Pyxis discrepancies, and prescriber errors with receiver operating characteristic areas under the curve of 0.96, 0.87, 0.96, and 0.81 respectively. We also found that modeling the brief
without the resolution text generally improved model performance. These models were integrated into a
dashboard visualization to support the patient safety committee review process.
Conclusions: We demonstrate the capabilities of various NLP models and the use of two text inclusion strategies
at categorizing medication related patient safety events. The NLP models and visualization could be used to
improve the eﬃciency of patient safety event data review and analysis.

1. Introduction
Adverse drug events are a leading cause of preventable patient harm
[1–3]. In an eﬀort to reduce patient harm events associated with
medications many healthcare systems have implemented patient safety
event reporting systems to better identify safety hazards associated with
pharmacy and medication administration, as well as other types of
events [4,5]. The reporting systems generally provide a method for
provider staﬀ to submit a description of a safety hazard ranging from a
near miss, where no patient harm occurred, to a serious safety event
that resulted in patient harm.
Many patient safety event reporting systems contain hundreds to
thousands of medication related events and have the potential to
dramatically improve care and reduce adverse drug events [6,7].
However, there are several challenges associated with the data from
these reporting systems [8]. Often, the data are diﬃcult to interpret and
act on because of the large number of reports, amount of free-text, and

⁎

Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: allan.fong@medstar.net, af2012@gmail.com (A. Fong).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2017.05.005
Received 27 February 2016; Received in revised form 24 March 2017; Accepted 8 May 2017
1386-5056/ © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

variability in category assignment by reporters.
In order to utilize the patient safety event data more rigorously
many hospitals have created review committees, composed of clinicians
focused on safety and quality, to review each event, categorize them
appropriately to better understand trends, and develop solutions once
trends are recognized. The committee review of the events is an
incredibly labor intensive process given the large volume of reports
generated each week. This diﬃculty is compounded in large healthcare
systems where data from multiple hospitals need to be eﬃciently
analyzed to understand overall patterns and trends across the system.
Each report can take several minutes to initially review and then
additional time during the committee meeting to further discuss.
Our goal is to develop a more eﬃcient and streamlined method for
categorizing patient safety event reports based on modeling the freetext of event reports to reduce the review time of the committee. We
describe a collaborative eﬀort in which informatics and safety science
experts joined a clinical safety committee to develop an algorithmic

International Journal of Medical Informatics 104 (2017) 120–125

A. Fong et al.

approach to more automatically review and categorize medication
events. The intent is to eventually develop a computational system
that can categorize events in near real-time, hence reducing the time for
committee review and expediting the process of identifying meaningful
trends that can then be acted on to reduce adverse drug events. There
are three main contributions of this case report. First, we develop and
evaluate the performance of diﬀerent modeling techniques to categorize four medication safety issues. Second, we evaluate model performance of two text inclusion conditions. The ﬁrst condition includes
only the brief factual description from medication related event reports
as provided by the frontline staﬀ member entering the report. The
second combines both the brief factual description and resolution text,
which is a short description typically provided by a manager that has
reviewed the event report. Lastly we deploy the best models in an
interactive visualization which categorizes reports in near real-time and
allows users to provide feedback to the algorithm allowing for
continued model training.

research has primarily focused on assigning events to general categories
such as computer related events or harm events [13,15]. Our focus is on
developing algorithms to classify events into speciﬁc categories that are
more actionable by the patient safety committee, such as medication
workﬂow. For this application we evaluated support vector machines
(SVM), decision trees (DT), and cosine similarity (COS) models to
classify speciﬁc medication related patient safety events. In addition to
the diﬀerence in speciﬁcity, previous work has generally considered
reports as a single document either only considering the brief text or
concatenating the brief and resolution text. It is unclear from previous
work which strategy is more accurate for categorizing events in speciﬁc
categories. We present an evaluation of these two diﬀerent text
inclusion strategies.

2. Background

To train and validate our models, we started with 774 medication
safety events that have been manually annotated and reviewed by the
safety and quality committee (2 MDs, 1 PharmD, 3 RNs). Every report
has a free-text brief factual description ranging from 9 to 424 words
(77.9 mean, 59 median, 63.3 std). Six hundred ninety-ﬁve reports
(90%) have resolution free-text averaging 50.6 words (29 median 29,
61.7 std) and were used for the model development eﬀorts, Fig. 1. This
study was approved by the MedStar Health Research Institute Institutional Review Board (protocol #2014-101).

3. Method
3.1. Data sources

2.1. Data elements in patient safety event reports
Patient safety event reporting systems are generally composed of
structured and unstructured data [9,10]. When entering a report, the
frontline staﬀ selects a general category from a predeﬁned list of
categories (e.g. medication, fall, surgery) and a speciﬁc event type
category. The reporter then enters a free-text description (brief factual
description) of the safety hazards which can vary in length. Lastly,
reports can sometimes be accompanied with additional free-text about
how the event was resolved or addressed (resolution).
A major challenge with patient safety event reports is that the
categories selected by reporters are often inaccurate and to fully
understand the safety event, one has to read the free-text description.
These category types are often ambiguous to the reporter and the
reporter generally does not have the time to determine which category
is the best ﬁt for often complex events [11].

3.2. Medication categories
We selected four medication safety event categories to model,
described in Table 1. These categories tend to focus on workﬂow and
decision making processes around medication safety events and were
identiﬁed by the committee as promising categories for eventually
introducing interventions to reduce the identiﬁed safety hazard. Of the
695 reports with brief and resolution text, 56 reports were categorized
as pharmacy delivery delays, 68 were categorized as pharmacy dispensing errors, 108 reports were categorized as prescriber errors, and 64
were categorized as Pyxis discrepancy errors. The remaining 399
reports were categorized into other categories and included as negative
cases in the model development.

2.2. Clinical committee review
At MedStar Georgetown University Hospital a committee composed
of physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and patient safety experts review
each patient safety event report. The committee discusses each event,
recategorizes the event if necessary, examines whether there are trends
in the reports, and develops and implements potential solutions. Each
meeting lasts an average of one to two hours, but committee members
spend an average of two to four hours prior to the meeting manually
reviewing events, categorizing, and identifying trends. Our goal is to
develop a more eﬃcient method for categorizing patient safety event
reports to reduce the time investment of the committee. To do this, two
data analytics experts (AF and RR), who have worked extensively with
patient safety event data, joined the committee to learn about their
classiﬁcation process, develop natural language processing (NLP)
algorithms, and work with the committee to validate and implement
the algorithms [10–12]. Our focus was on medication events because
these events are frequently reported, pose tremendous risk to patients,
and require extensive time to review by the pharmacist and committee
relative to other event types.

3.3. Approach
We developed classiﬁcation models for each of the four categories
(pharmacy delivery delays, pharmacy dispensing errors, prescriber
errors, and Pyxis discrepancy errors) in Table 1. This was done by
using the identiﬁed events for the error type being modeled as positive
cases and using all the remaining reports as negative cases, including
the other three error types and the 399 “other” categories. As an
example, for the prescriber error model the 108 prescriber error reports
served as positive instances and the remaining reports (587) served as
negative prescriber error reports for training and testing of the
prescriber error model. For each category, we ﬁrst set aside 20% of
the annotated reports for testing, Fig. 1. For each category, 20% of the
test set was randomly selected from the corresponding positive
instances of the respective category and the remaining 80% of the test
set was randomly selected from the respective negative instances. This
semi-random approach was to ensure that the proportion of positive
reports in the training sets were the same as in the test sets. For
prescriber error, 87 positive instances and 470 negative instances were
used for all training models and 21 positive instances and 117 negative
instances were used for testing all models. For pharmacy dispensing
error, 55 positive and 502 negative instances were used for training and
13 positive and 125 negative instances were used for testing. For Pyxis
discrepancy, 52 positive and 505 negative instances were used for

2.3. Natural language processing
Natural language processing (NLP) techniques have been previously
used to explore and mine patient safety event reports. Examples include
identifying latent themes and topics in reports, serious safety events,
and health information technology related events [11,13,14]. Various
statistical methods, each with diﬀerent advantages and limitations,
have been used to train and classify text [13]. However, previous
121

International Journal of Medical Informatics 104 (2017) 120–125

A. Fong et al.

Fig. 1. Overview of the algorithm development and testing approach. The number of positive and negative prescriber error instances used for training and testing are provided as an
example. Each modeling condition uses the same training data for each safety category.

Precision is deﬁned as the number of true positives divided by the sum
of true and false positives. Accuracy is deﬁned as the sum of true
positives and true negatives divided by the total population size of the
tested data. Our approach is summarized in Fig. 1.

training and 12 positive and 126 negative instances were used for
testing. For pharmacy delivery delay, 45 positive and 512 negative
instances were used for training and 11 positive and 127 negative
instances were used for testing. We trained and evaluated three
diﬀerent techniques, support vector machine (SVM), decision tree
(DT), and cosine similarity (COS), for each category [16,17]. There
are two text components that could be used for model development.
The brief factual description which is an input from the event reporter
and the resolution which is input by a manager to provide more context
around the event. We evaluated two diﬀerent text inclusion conditions
to determine how these text components contribute to model performance: use only the brief free-text [B] or concatenate the brief and
resolution free-text [B + R]. In both approaches, the same preprocessing was applied to generate feature vectors for training. The text was
ﬁrst tokenized into unigrams and then stemmed. Numbers, punctuations, and common English stopwords as well as domain speciﬁc
stopwords (such as “nurse” and “patient”) were removed. Lastly, to
reduce dimensionality, sparse terms which were deﬁned as terms
occurring in less than 1% of the documents, were removed. For each
category, we trained six models using the remaining unigrams as the
feature vectors a in bag-of-words approach. Each of these models’
precision, accuracy, and receiver operating characteristic area under
the curve (ROC AUC) were evaluated using the reserved testing data.

3.4. Model development
We developed SVM with Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel models
using 10 cross-fold validation on the training data. We generated DTs
with the training data, iterating and pruning until a precision and
accuracy of 85% was reached. Lastly, we evaluated a COS approach by
utilizing two feature vectors, one from the target reports and the other
from the non-target reports. We then calculated the cosine distance
between the two feature vectors and classiﬁed the report based on their
distances from the vectors.
3.5. Medication PSE visualization
We deployed the best performing models in a dashboard visualization. The classiﬁcation algorithm is applied to new reports which can
then be regularly updated. Because there is imprecision in the
algorithms, we use a semi-supervised strategy to incorporate user
feedback to provide corrections. The corrections provided will be

Table 1
Brief description of annotation categories and their frequency of occurrence in the dataset.
Annotated categories (count)

Brief description

Pharmacy Delivery Delay (56)
Pharmacy Dispensing Error (68)
Prescriber Error (108)

Errors that involve the delivery of medications late or after the time needed to administer
Errors related to pharmacy dispensing incorrect medications, wrong dose, or wrong formulation
Errors stemming from a prescriber error; mainly includes medication dosing errors but can also include prescribing wrong medication, wrong
route, wrong indication, etc.
Errors that involve the incorrect returning of medication to Pyxis

Pyxis Discrepancy (64)

122

International Journal of Medical Informatics 104 (2017) 120–125

A. Fong et al.

Table 2
Accuracy, precision, F1-score, sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and ROC AUC of each medication category modeled under both the brief text and the brief + resolution text conditions (gray
highlight models with highest AUC). *Low precision and sensitivity results of Pharmacy Dispensing Errors SVM using brief text caused by the model categorizing all reports as negative.

Dispensing Error were the least similar, Fig. 2.

updated in near real-time and will also be used to retrain the algorithm.
4. Results

4.3. Application to medication PSE dashboard
4.1. Performance
Lastly, the models with the highest AUC were integrated into a
dashboard using RShiny [20]. The dashboard, Fig. 3, provides users an
overview of the events by categories over time with an option to select
diﬀerent date ranges. Importantly users can update model results by
identifying incorrectly categorized reports.

Accuracy, precision, F1-score, sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and ROC AUC
metrics for each approach are summarized in Table 2. ROC AUC was
used to rank the relative performance of the models as this metrics
combines both sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Pyxis Discrepancy and
Pharmacy Delivery Delay SVM models had high and similar AUC
results between the [B] and [B + R] conditions. While there are no
previous studies to compare these prediction of medication workﬂow
related patient safety events, the Pyxis Discrepancy and Pharmacy
Delivery Delay AUC results are comparable to previous patient safety
event health information technology modeling work [18,19]. COS
models had higher AUC results for Prescriber Error and Pharmacy
Dispensing Error reports. Furthermore, models under the [B] condition
had the highest AUC results across all categories.

5. Discussion
Integrating data analytic and safety science expertise with the
clinical safety committee to streamline the analysis and categorization
of patient safety events has led to promising results. The clinicians
provided the data analytics experts with the necessary domain speciﬁc
knowledge to develop NLP techniques to recategorize medication
patient safety events into speciﬁc workﬂow related categories. The
models can serve to dramatically reduce the time investment currently
required by the review committee. By integrating these models into an
interactive visualization the clinical staﬀ is able to gain insights in a
more timely fashion and the clinicians can provide feedback and
corrections to update the model results, especially in situations of poor
precision (e.g. pharmacy dispensing errors).

4.2. Brief and resolution free-text
To further investigate these results, we compared the brief text to
the resolution text for each category. While on average briefs are longer
than resolutions, Prescriber Error resolutions tended to be longer than
briefs. In addition, calculating the cosine distance between valid brief
and resolution text vectors shows that Prescriber Error and Pharmacy

Fig. 2. Cosine similarities between brief and resolution text by categories.

123

International Journal of Medical Informatics 104 (2017) 120–125

A. Fong et al.

Fig. 3. Medication safety event dashboard prototype.

model results.

5.1. Brief and resolution free-text
The AUC results suggest that the modeling the brief free-text alone
could generate suﬃcient models. Excluding the resolution free-text
from reports can reduce extraneous information as well as reduce
processing time.

Contributorship statement
According to the deﬁnition given by the International Committee of
Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE), Allan Fong qualiﬁes for authorship
including making substantial contributions to the intellectual content of
conception and design, acquisition of data, and analysis and interpretation of data. Furthermore, Allan Fong has participated in drafting of the
manuscript and critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content. Allan Fong is the corresponding author.
According to the deﬁnition given by the International Committee of
Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE), Nicole Harriott qualiﬁes for authorship including making substantial contributions to the intellectual
content of analysis, acquisition of data, and interpretation of data.
Furthermore, Nicole Harriott has participated in drafting of the manuscript and critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual
content.
According to the deﬁnition given by the International Committee of
Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE), Donna M. Walters qualiﬁes for
authorship including making substantial contributions to the intellectual content of conception and design, acquisition of data, and
interpretation of data. Furthermore, Donna M. Walters has participated
in drafting of the manuscript and critical revision of the manuscript for
important intellectual content.
According to the deﬁnition given by the International Committee of
Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE), Hanan Foley qualify for authorship
including making substantial contributions to the intellectual content of
conception and design and interpretation of data. Furthermore, Hanan
Foley has participated in drafting of the manuscript and critical revision
of the manuscript for important intellectual content.
According to the deﬁnition given by the International Committee of
Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE), Richard Morrissey qualify for authorship including making substantial contributions to the intellectual
content of conception and design and interpretation of data.
Furthermore, Richard Morrissey has participated in drafting of the
manuscript and critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content.

5.2. Limitations and future work
Medical ontologies, such as SNOMED, were not used in this analysis.
These ontologies tend to be centered more around medical concepts and
less applicable to patient safety concepts (e.g. communication, handoﬀs, and teamwork). However, it would be interesting to investigate if
adapting such ontologies can increase predictive power of these models.
Understanding these limitations, the dashboard was built with the
option for users to provide feedback to the model when there are
incorrectly categorized reports. Determining when new domain knowledge or context should be incorporated into a model is diﬃcult.
However, we believe that this work provides a step towards incorporating an active learning feedback mechanism to monitor a shift in
context when discussing safety events. This highlights the importance
of integrating computational expertise and clinical expertise to analyze
safety event data. Through this iterative process of feedback and model
reﬁnement, the underlying model performance should improve.
Furthermore, these models were developed using reports from one
hospital. Workﬂow, culture, and policies can vary between hospitals
which can limit the generalizability of our models. Testing and
validating these models on reports from other hospitals and hospital
systems will be an important next step.
6. Conclusion
We evaluated diﬀerent NLP modeling techniques and text inclusion
strategies to categorize four speciﬁc medication workﬂow safety events.
We demonstrated the predictive capabilities of these models while
highlighting the cautionary beneﬁts with using additional resolution
text in the model. Lastly, the models were incorporated into an
interactive visualization that provide users a way to directly update
124

International Journal of Medical Informatics 104 (2017) 120–125

A. Fong et al.

events in hospitalized adults, J. Gen. Intern. Med. 8 (1993) 289–294.
[2] A. Malpass, S.C. Helps, E.J. Sexton, et al., A classiﬁcation for adverse drug events, J.
Qual. Clin. Pract. 19 (1999) 23–26.
[3] L.L. Leape, T.A. Brennan, N.M. Laird, et al., The nature of adverse events in
hospitalized patients. Results of the Harvard Medical Practice Study II, N. Engl. J.
Med. 324 (1991) 377–384.
[4] P. Aspden, J.W. Corrigan, S.M. Erickson, Patient safety reporting systems and
applications, Patient Safety: Achieving a New Standard of Care, National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C, 2004, pp. 250–278.
[5] J. Rosenthal, M. Booth, Maximizing the Use of State Adverse Event Data to Improve
Patient Safety, National Academy for State Health Policy, Portlan, ME, 2005
Retrieved Jan 15, 2016, from http://www.nashp.org/Files/Patient%5FSafety
%5FGNL61%5Ffor%5Fweb.pdf.
[6] P.J. Pronovost, D.A. Thompson, C.G. Holzmueller, et al., Toward learning from
patient safety reporting systems, J. Clin. Nurs. 21 (2006) 305–315 http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=
Citation&list_uids=17175416.
[7] A.W. Wu, P.J. Pronovost, L. Morlock, ICU incident reporting systems, J. Crit. Care
17 (2002) 86–94 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12096371.
[8] D.R. Longo, J.E. Hewett, B. Ge, et al., The long road to patient safety: a status report
on patient safety systems, JAMA 294 (2005) 2858–2865 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Citation&list_uids=
16352793.
[9] J. White, Adverse Event Reporting and Learning Systems: A Review of the Relevant
Literature, The Canadian Patient Safety Institute, 2007.
[10] A. Fong, A.Z. Hettinger, R.M. Ratwani, Exploring methods for identifying related
patient safety events using structured and unstructured data, J. Biomed. Inf. 58
(2015) 89–95, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2015.09.011.
[11] A. Fong, R.M. Ratwani, An evaluation of patient safety event report categories using
unsupervised topic modeling, Methods Inf. Med. 54.4 (2015) 338–345.
[12] R. Ratwani, A. Fong, ‘Connecting the dots’: leveraging visual analytics to make
sense of patient safety event reports, J. Am. Med. Inf. Assoc. 22.2 (2014) 312–317.
[13] M.-S. Ong, F. Magrabi, E. Coiera, Automated identiﬁcation of extreme-risk events in
clinical incident reports, J. Am. Med. Inf. Assoc. 19 (2012) e110–8, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000562.
[14] K.E.K. Chai, S. Anthony, E. Coiera, et al., Using statistical text classiﬁcation to
identify health information technology incidents, J. Am. Med. Inf. Assoc. 6 (2013)
1–6, http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/amiajnl-2012-001409.
[15] M.-S. Ong, F. Magrabi, E. Coiera, Automated categorisation of clinical incident
reports using statistical text classiﬁcation, Qual. Saf. Health Care 19 (2010) e55,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/qshc.2009.036657.
[16] A. Liaw, M. Wiener, Classiﬁcation and Regression by randomForest 2 R News, 2002,
pp. 18–22 http://cran.r-project.org/doc/Rnews/.
[17] E. Dimitriadou, K. Hornik, F. Leisch, et al. e1071: Miscellaneous Functions of the
Department of Statistics. R Packag version 16 2011.
[18] M.-S. Ong, F. Magrabi, E. Coiera, Automated categorisation of clinical incident
reports using statistical text classiﬁcation, Qual. Saf. Health Care 19 (2010) e55,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/qshc.2009.036657.
[19] K.E.K. Chai, S. Anthony, E. Coiera, et al., Using statistical text classiﬁcation to
identify health information technology incidents, J. Am. Med. Inf. Assoc. 20 (2013)
980–985, http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/amiajnl-2012-001409.
[20] Web Application Framework for R, 2016. http://shiny.rstudio.com/.

According to the deﬁnition given by the International Committee of
Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE), Raj Ratwani qualify for authorship
including making substantial contributions to the intellectual content of
conception and design and interpretation of data. Furthermore, Raj
Ratwani has participated in drafting of the manuscript and critical
revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.
Statement on conﬂict of interest
The authors have no competing interests or conﬂicts of interest.
Funding statement
N/A.
Summary table
What was known

• Extracting information from patient safety reports is challenging in large part due to the variability in reporting
• NLP techniques can assist in understanding free-text
Added knowledge

• Considering
•

only the brief descriptions of patient safety
reports was generally suﬃcient for developing reliable
classiﬁcation models
Integration of models into visualization requires mechanism
for users to provide feedback to the models

Acknowledgements
We are very thankful to the entire review committee and the
dedication of the frontline reporters working to make our hospital
and systems safer.
References
[1] D.W. Bates, L.L. Leape, S. Petrycki, Incidence and preventability of adverse drug

125

