i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f m e d i c a l i n f o r m a t i c s 7 8 ( 2 0 0 9 ) e97–e103

journal homepage: www.intl.elsevierhealth.com/journals/ijmi

Inﬂuence of the MedDRA® hierarchy on pharmacovigilance
data mining results
Ronald K. Pearson a , Manfred Hauben b,c,d , David I. Goldsmith e , A. Lawrence Gould f ,
David Madigan g , Donald J. O’Hara a , Stephanie J. Reisinger a , Alan M. Hochberg a,∗
a

ProSanos Corporation, 225 Market St, Suite 502, Harrisburg, PA 17102, USA
Pﬁzer Corporation, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA
c New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA
d Brunel University, West London, UK
e Goldsmith Pharmacovigilance and Systems, New York, NY, USA
f Merck Research Laboratories, West Point, PA, USA
g Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
b

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:

Purpose: To compare the results of drug safety data mining with three different algorithms,

Received 17 November 2008

when adverse events are identiﬁed using MedDRA1 Preferred Terms (PT) vs. High Level Terms

Accepted 13 January 2009

(HLT) vs. Standardised MedDRA Queries (SMQ).
Methods: For a representative set of 26 drugs, data from the FDA Adverse Event Reporting
System (AERS) database from 2001 through 2005 was mined for signals of disproportion-

Keywords:

ate reporting (SDRs) using three different data mining algorithms (DMAs): the Gamma

MedDRA

Poisson Shrinker (GPS), the urn-model algorithm (URN), and the proportional reporting

Data mining

rate (PRR) algorithm. Results were evaluated using a previously described Reference Event

Terminology

Database (RED) which contains documented drug–event associations for the 26 drugs. Analy-

Proportional reporting rate

sis emphasized the percentage of SDRs in the “unlabeled supported” category, corresponding

Urn model

to those adverse events that were not described in the U.S. prescribing information for the

Gamma Poisson Shrinker

drug at the time of its approval, but which were supported by some published evidence for
an association with the drug.
Results: Based on a logistic regression analysis, the percentage of unlabeled supported SDRs
was smallest at the PT level, intermediate at the HLT level, and largest at the SMQ level,
for all three algorithms. The GPS and URN methods detected comparable percentages of
unlabeled supported SDRs while the PRR method detected a smaller percentage, at all three
MedDRA levels. No evidence of a method/level interaction was seen.
Conclusions: Use of HLT and SMQ groupings can improve the percentage of unlabeled supported SDRs in data mining results. The trade-off for this gain is the medically less-speciﬁc
language of HLTs and SMQs compared to PTs, and the need for the added step in data
mining of examining the component PTs of each HLT or SMQ that results in a signal of
disproportionate reporting.
© 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

1

MedDRA® is a registered trademark of the International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Associations (IFPMA).
Corresponding author at: ProSanos Corporation, 225 Market St, Suite 502, Harrisburg, PA 17102, USA. Tel.: +1 717 635 2124.
E-mail address: alan.hochberg@prosanos.com (A.M. Hochberg).
1386-5056/$ – see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2009.01.001
∗

e98

1.

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f m e d i c a l i n f o r m a t i c s 7 8 ( 2 0 0 9 ) e97–e103

Introduction

The limitations inherent in spontaneous reporting databases
like the FDA’s Adverse Event Reporting System (AERS) are
widely recognized [1], but these databases remain an important basis for drug safety analysis [2–6]. While there is not yet
a general consensus on how best to incorporate data mining
methods into pharmacovigilance programs [7], the area continues to be one of active research [8]. Since they represent
important practical choices in performing pharmacovigilance
analysis, two questions of particular interest are which of
the available data mining methods should be used [2,8] and
how adverse events should be represented [9,10]. This paper
examines both of these issues, comparing the results obtained
for a ﬁxed set of drugs across three choices of data mining
algorithm (DMA) and three different adverse event representations, all applied to a ﬁxed portion of the AERS database.
We make no claim that the comparisons presented here are
exhaustive – for example, we have not included either the
BCPNN method [11] or the Bayesian binary regression (BBR)
method [12,8] in these comparisons, nor have we considered
all commonly used adverse event representations – but we feel
that these comparisons do give some useful insights into the
inﬂuence of both of these factors on pharmacovigilance data
mining results.
The methods considered here are listed in Section 2.3 and
described in more detail in Appendix A, but an important point
in the following discussion is that, for a given drug/event combination, all three algorithms may be described in terms of
four record counts in the database to which they are applied:
1.
2.
3.
4.

N = the total number of records in the database;
Na = the number of records listing Drug A;
Nb = the number of records listing Adverse Event B;
Nab = the number of records listing both Drug A and Adverse
Event B.

Here, these record counts are based on the Individual Safety
Report (ISR) numbers in the AERS database. Note that the
choice of a MedDRA hierarchy level inﬂuences Nb and Nab , but
it does not alter either N or Na for any given drug. This paper
examines the consequences of these changes in Nb and Nab .
MedDRA® (Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities) [13]
is the international medical terminology developed under the
auspices of the International Conference on Harmonization
of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). Essentially, it is a controlled medical
vocabulary for describing adverse events, with ﬁve levels: the
coarsest is System Organ Class (SOC), followed by High Level
Group Term (HLGT), Higher Level Term (HLT), Preferred Term
(PT), and ﬁnally Lowest Level Term (LLT), the ﬁnest grained
description. Since adverse events are represented in the AERS
database at the PT level, it is only possible to apply data
mining algorithms to this database at this level and above
in the MedDRA hierarchy. To examine the inﬂuence of the
adverse event representation chosen, this study compares
the results obtained at the PT and HLT levels. In addition,
we also compare the results obtained when adverse events
are represented as Standardised MedDRA Queries (SMQs) [14],

pre-deﬁned combinations of PTs that typically correspond to
commonly encountered drug safety concerns. SMQs can be
deﬁned in several different ways; here, we adopt the so-called
“narrow” scope deﬁnitions [14]. Note that for convenience we
follow common practice in this paper by referring colloquially
to MedDRA “levels” and “hierarchy”, while recognizing that
MedDRA® features such as SMQs and secondary HLTs may
yield relationships among terms that are not hierarchical in
a strict mathematical sense.
Each Individual Safety Report in the AERS database lists one
or more drugs, along with one or more MedDRA PTs. To study
mining the AERS database at the HLT level, we need to specify
how to associate HLTs with each of those PTs. In the MedDRA®
system, every MedDRA® PT is included in one primary HLT, but
it may also be included in one or more secondary HLTs. Our
rule is that every ISR listing a particular PT is assigned to all of
the HLTs which contain it, both primary and secondary HLTs.
That means that our level conversion process may increase
the number of adverse events listed for a given ISR. For some
ISRs, two or more PTs associated will belong to the same HLT.
For these, we do not double-count HLTs. The ISR is assigned
to the appropriate HLT, but only once.
After HLTs have been assigned to each ISR, adverse event
counts Nb are obtained by counting the number of ISRs for
each HLT, and case counts Nab are obtained by counting ISRs
listing each HLT together with the speciﬁed drug.
For SMQs, an analogous procedure is applied for all PTs
that are included in one or more SMQs. Since some PTs are
not included in any SMQ, all remaining adverse events remain
represented as PTs and data mining is performed based on this
mix of non-SMQ-associated PTs and SMQs. In considering the
SMQ results, it is therefore useful to distinguish between the
raw results characterizing this combination of PTs and SMQs
from the results obtained by restricting consideration to SMQs
only. In the following discussions, the raw results are designated SMQ+ (i.e., “SMQs plus PTs”), while the restricted results
are designated SMQo (i.e., “SMQ only”).

2.

Methods

2.1.

The data source

All computational results presented here were based on the
portion of the FOI release of the AERS database from ﬁrst quarter 2001 through fourth quarter 2005, consisting of N = 898,566
records. To correct for the effects of inconsistencies over time
induced by changes in the MedDRA PTs, all adverse events
were reconciled with MedDRA Version 10.0 PTs. Speciﬁcally,
any AERS adverse event speciﬁcation that did not correspond
to a MedDRA Version 10.0 PT was mapped to the appropriate
MedDRA Version 10.0 PT [13].

2.2.

The drugs considered

The results presented here are based on the 26 drugs listed
in Table 1. These drugs are a subset of a set of 37 drugs
previously studied [15]. They represent the subset for which
at least one signal of disproportionate reporting (SDR) was
detected by all three of the data mining methods used. The

e99

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f m e d i c a l i n f o r m a t i c s 7 8 ( 2 0 0 9 ) e97–e103

Table 1 – The 26 drugs considered in this study and the number of AERS records listing each one (Na ).
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Drug
Adefovir dipivoxil
Amlodipine besylate
Aripiprazole
Bivalirudin
Clofarabine
Darifenacin HBr
Docosanol
Eletriptan HBr
Erlotinib HCl
Ezetimibe
Gadobenate dimeglumine
Icodextrin
Mifepristone

Na
237
22593
4802
406
100
251
4369
568
539
8255
156
266
967

number (Na ) of AERS ISRs listing each drug is also given in
Table 1.

2.3.

The algorithms compared

The algorithms compared in this paper are the Gamma Poisson Shrinker (GPS) method of DuMouchel [3], the proportional
reporting rate (PRR) method [4], and the urn-model method
(URN) [5]. Brief descriptions of these algorithms are given in
Appendix A; for more detailed descriptions, see the references
cited here.

2.4.

No.

The Reference Event Database

We have developed and applied an adjudication process to
classify SDRs according to a level of published evidence that
the association is causal [15]. The basis for this adjudication
is a highly inclusive Reference Event Database (RED), compiled from original and revised drug labels, Cautions and Side
Effects information from the British National Formulary, and
peer-reviewed publications obtained from a MEDLINE search
based on the chemical name of the drug. While this adjudication process is heuristic in nature and not as deﬁnitive as a
case-level clinical review, the AERS database does not provide
the data necessary to undertake such a review and these adjudication results represent a practical compromise, providing
a mechanism for making literature-based assessments of the
statistical results obtained from data mining algorithms.
The results presented here were obtained by adjudicating
all SDRs detected by any of the three DMAs at any of the three
MedDRA levels considered, assigning each SDR to one of the
following 10 evidence classes:
• I-INDICATION, corresponding to reports of the drug’s indication or related consequences as an adverse event (e.g.,
“fungal infection” for an anti-fungal drug);
• G-GENERIC, corresponding to inherently non-informative
adverse event designations (e.g., “unknown adverse event”);
• D-DUPLICATES, corresponding to adverse events detected
as SDRs because of duplicate reporting, based on an examination of individual AERS reports;
• 0-REGULATORY ACTION, corresponding to an adverse reaction cited in a regulatory action taken after the drug’s
approval;

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

Drug

Na

Olmesartan medoxomil
Oxcarbazepine
Pregabalin
Rivastigmine tartrate
Rosiglitazone maleate
Solifenacin succinate
Telithromycin
Tinzaparin sodium
Treprostinil sodium
Trospium chloride
Venlafaxine HCl
Voriconazole
Zonisamide

2085
3164
404
1363
11118
496
1448
391
111
180
12796
1262
1279

• 1-ORIGINAL LABEL, corresponding to a known adverse reaction listed on the U.S. prescribing information at the time of
the initial FDA approval;
• 2-DEFINITE, corresponding to an adverse event which met
pre-deﬁned conditions for a deﬁnite causal association with
the drug as outlined in a previous study [15];
• 3-PROBABLE, corresponding to an adverse event which met
previously deﬁned conditions for a probable causal association with the drug;
• 4-POSSIBLE, corresponding to an adverse event which met
pre-deﬁned conditions for a possible causal association
with the drug;
• 5-MINIMAL, corresponding to an adverse event mentioned
in the RED in connection with the drug, but for which the
associated references provided no information on causality;
• 6-LACKING, corresponding to an adverse event that does not
appear in the RED in association with the drug.
In this paper, we are particularly interested in SDRs that
may be classiﬁed as unlabeled but supported (U/S), meaning
that there is some degree of evidence in support of a causal
drug/event association in the Reference Event Database, but
that the adverse event did not appear in the U.S. prescribing
information at the time of the drug’s initial approval by the
FDA. Speciﬁcally, an SDR for a given drug is included in the U/S
class if its adjudication falls into one of the numbered classes
0, 2, 3, 4, or 5 listed above.

3.

Results

Table 2 summarizes the number of SDRs detected by each of
the three DMAs considered here at each of the MedDRA levels. Note that entries for the SMQ approach are included for
both the “mixed SMQ/PT” results (i.e., the SMQ+ numbers) and

Table 2 – Number of SDRs detected by each method at
each MedDRA level.
Method
GPS
PRR
URN

PT

HLT

SMQ+

763
3616
1562

452
1689
1177

407
2086
1084

SMQo
115
255
356

e100

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f m e d i c a l i n f o r m a t i c s 7 8 ( 2 0 0 9 ) e97–e103

Table 3 – Detection summary by MedDRA level and data mining algorithm: average percentages (over all drugs) of
drug/event combinations which were detected as SDRs; average percentage of SDRs at a given MedDRA level (by any
method) which were detected by each data-mining method; and the percentage of all unlabeled/supported SDRs at a
given MedDRA level (by any method) which were detected by each data mining method.
Level

Method

PT
PT
PT
HLT
HLT
HLT
SMQ
SMQ
SMQ

GPS
URN
PRR
GPS
URN
PRR
GPS
URN
PRR

% of drug–event combinations
which are SDRs by the method
4.55%
6.32%
12.43%
3.99%
7.76%
12.97%
1.47%
2.71%
2.79%

the “pure SMQ” results obtained by restricting consideration
to only PTs contained within an SMQ (i.e., the SMQo numbers). Two main conclusions are clear from this table. First,
for all three DMAs, the number of SDRs detected decreases
substantially in going from the PT level to the HLT level, to the
SMQ level (i.e., the SMQo numbers), consistent with the relative sizes of each class. This result is not surprising and simply
means that any tendency to gain signal strength by performing data mining at higher levels is not enough to offset this
overall decline in the number of possible SDRs at each level.
The second key conclusion follows from the large differences
between the SMQ+ and SMQo counts, implying that most of
the adverse events detected using the SMQ-level data mining
strategy described in Section 1 are isolated PTs not belonging
to any SMQ.
The GPS method detects the smallest total number of SDRs
at all three MedDRA levels. PRR detects the largest number of total SDRs, except for the SMQo level, where the URN
algorithm detects more. This may be a result of the variable
(Bonferroni-corrected) threshold used by the URN algorithm,
which corrects the threshold based on the total number of
adverse event terms associated with a given drug.
Table 3 gives three additional views of these results, based
on detection percentages instead of raw counts, averaged over
all 26 drugs. The ﬁrst column gives the average percentage of
reported adverse event terms that generate SDRs by each datamining method and at each level. In terms of these numbers,
the GPS method produces the lowest percentage and the PRR
method produces the highest percentage, at all three MedDRA
levels. Also, the differences between the PT and HLT percentages appear to be fairly minor, while the SMQ percentages are
much lower for all three methods. The next column gives the
percentages of all SDRs detected by any method at a ﬁxed MedDRA level that are detected by the indicated method. In more
exact terms, if G, U, and P represent the sets of SDRs detected
by each of the three methods GPS, URN, and PRR respectively
at a given level for a given drug, and “| · |” represents the size
of a set, the listed percentage for GPS is:
100 ×

|G|
|{G ∪ U ∪ P}|

and similarly for the other methods. At the PT and HLT levels,
these assessments are in complete agreement with the assessments based on total adverse event reports just given: the GPS

% of all SDRs detected
by the method
19.9%
40.8%
94.5%
22.9%
59.5%
85.4%
28.7%
88.8%
63.6%

% of all U/S SDRs detected by
the method
26.8%
52.7%
89.2%
24.7%
67.7%
83.4%
29.1%
94.5%
49.1%

method gives the smallest percentage, the PRR method the
largest, and the URN method is intermediate. At the SMQ level,
however, the situation is different: there, the largest fraction
of SMQ-level SDRs is detected by the URN method instead of
the PRR method. Finally, the last column in Table 3 gives the
corresponding fraction of unlabeled/supported (U/S) SDRs for
each method among all U/S SDRs detected at the speciﬁed
level. These numbers are approximately the same as the SDR
percentages just described, but one small difference may be
worth noting: the U/S percentages are slightly larger than the
corresponding SDR percentages at all levels for the GPS and
URN methods, while they are slightly smaller at all levels for
the PRR method.
To further characterize the tendencies of the different algorithms and MedDRA levels to detect U/S signals, we applied
logistic regression [16] to the data mining results obtained
for all 26 drugs. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁned a binary outcome
variable for each SDR which was equal to 1 if the SDR
belonged to the U/S adjudication class and zero otherwise.
We then ﬁt a logistic regression model to estimate the conditional probability that an SDR falls into this class, given
the data mining method (Method) and the MedDRA terminology level (Level) as categorical covariates. This model was
ﬁt using the generalized linear modeling procedure glm in
the S-plus statistical software environment [17]. An analysis
of deviance showed both covariates to be highly signiﬁcant
(p = 0.0006 for Method and p = 0.0014 for Level). We also ﬁt a
model with a Method/Level interaction term, but this interaction was found not to be signiﬁcant (p = 0.6413). From the
two-covariate model, we computed the conditional probability
estimates, which are shown in Table 4 in the column labeled
%L* . These are the predicted fractions of unlabeled/supported
SDRs in each Method–Level category predicted by the logistic
regression model. This table also gives the total number of
SDRs (NSDR ) actually detected by each Method at each MedDRA level, the number of these that are unlabeled/supported
(NU∗ ), and the percentage (%U∗ = 100 × NU∗ /NSDR ). The excellent agreement between the actual percentages and those
predicted by the logistic regression model is evident. These
results show that both the choice of MedDRA hierarchy level
and the choice of data mining algorithm both signiﬁcantly
inﬂuence the percentage of unlabeled/supported SDRs, but
that they do so independently without a signiﬁcant interaction
between them.

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f m e d i c a l i n f o r m a t i c s 7 8 ( 2 0 0 9 ) e97–e103

Table 4 – Summary of the logistic regression results
obtained for the 26 drugs by all three methods and all
three MedDRA levels, including the number of SDRs
detected (NSDR ), the number of U/S SDRs detected (NU∗ ),
the raw percentages (%U* ) and the conditional
probabilities estimated by logistic regression (%L* ).
Method

Level

NSDR

NU∗

%U*

%L*

GPS

PT
HLT
SMQo

763
452
115

89
55
16

11.7%
12.2%
13.9%

11.1%
13.3%
14.2%

PRR

PT
HLT
SMQo

3616
1689
255

296
186
27

8.2%
11.0%
10.6%

8.5%
10.4%
11.1%

URN

PT
HLT
SMQo

1562
1177
356

175
151
52

11.2%
12.8%
14.6%

10.9%
13.3%
14.2%

Based on these logistic regression results, the PRR method
consistently detects the smallest fraction of U/S signals of the
three algorithms, while the GPS and URN methods are statistically indistinguishable, at all MedDRA levels.

4.

e101

Summary points
What was already known on this topic?
• Drug safety data mining algorithms differ in both the
number of safety signals detected and the extent to
which these signals are supported by external evidence.
• MedDRA High Level Terms (HLT) and Standardised MedDRA Queries (SMQ) have been employed to
aggregate individual cases and thereby improve the
detection sensitivity for speciﬁc adverse events.
What this study added to our knowledge?
• In either screening for previously unstudied potential
safety issues or looking for speciﬁc signals, the use
of HLT and SMQ groupings can improve the yield of
certain desirable types of results.
• This improvement holds for all of the data mining algorithms considered in this study and is greatest for the
SMQ groupings.

Discussion

The results presented here demonstrate that the MedDRA
level chosen to represent adverse events in pharmacovigilance
data mining strongly inﬂuences the number of SDRs detected
by any of the three DMAs considered here (the GPS method,
the PRR method, or the URN method). In particular, the number of SDRs detected declines for all three algorithms in going
from the PT level to the HLT level to the SMQ level, consistent with the decrease in the relative number of members
of each of these classes. Adjudicating the SDRs detected by
all three algorithms at these different MedDRA levels against
the Reference Event Database described in Section 2.4, we
ﬁnd that the fraction of U/S signals, representing drug/event
associations that were not on the label at the time of the
drug’s approval but for which published evidence supports
an association, are comparable for the URN and GPS methods and smaller for the PRR method. Also, we ﬁnd that this
fraction increases in going from the PT to the HLT to the SMQ
level.
Limitations inherent in this study include those due to
the particular set of drugs chosen, the portion of the AERS
database considered, and the incompleteness of the Reference Event Database described in Section 2.4. Attention
was restricted to the drugs considered here because we
had developed a reasonably complete set of adjudications
for them, providing the basis for the U/S percentage values used in interpreting the results presented in Section
3. Considering a longer duration of data from the AERS
database could also be advantageous, but MedDRA coding
has only been used in the AERS database since fourth quarter 1997, raising a signiﬁcant issue of reconciling adverse
event descriptions in any attempt to consider AERS data
prior to this date. Finally, we acknowledge that the Reference Event Database described in Section 2.4 is an imperfect
surrogate for detailed clinical analyses of case reports. In par-

ticular, the Reference Event Database is complete through
2005, so it does not include drug–event associations that take
many, many years to be discovered. Conversely, the Reference
Event Database does represent a practical approach to providing clinical knowledge for evaluating data mining results
in view of the fact that the AERS database does not contain
the information necessary to undertake detailed clinical case
analyses.
It has previously been suggested that it may be advantageous to initially perform data mining using a coarser
grained adverse event representation than the MedDRA PT
level, followed by subsequent examination of component PTs
[10]. The results presented here suggest that data mining
at higher levels does increase the concentration of unlabeled/supported SDRs in the data mining output, although
three points should be borne in mind. First, because they are
less speciﬁc, terms at the HLT and SMQ may be more difﬁcult to interpret than individual PTs, which tend to clearly
deﬁne a precise medical condition. Second, since the number of individual cases citing these higher level terms is larger
than the number citing a particular component PT, follow-up
analyses of higher level results will generally involve more
individual cases to review. The third important point about
data mining at higher levels is that while the fraction of U/S
SDRs detected at the HLT and SMQ levels is higher than that
at the PT level, the total number of U/S SDRs detected is largest
at the PT level. These observations highlight the fact that
the choice of MedDRA level which gives an optimal tradeoff between sensitivity and speciﬁcity in pharmacovigilance
data mining remains an open question which is hopefully
illuminated, but deﬁnitely not resolved, by this study. Finally,
while we have not explored the effects of data mining at
the HLGT or SOC MedDRA levels, the results presented here
suggest that this may be an interesting avenue for future
research.

e102

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f m e d i c a l i n f o r m a t i c s 7 8 ( 2 0 0 9 ) e97–e103

A.3. The URN method [5]

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by a grant from the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers Association (PhRMA) to
ProSanos Corporation. All authors participated in the preparation, review, and approval of the manuscript. The authors
thank Dr. Lester Reich for his participation in the signaladjudication process and Dr. Ivan Zorych of Rutgers University
for software implementation of the GPS algorithm. Finally,
the authors wish to thank Patricia Mozzicato (MedDRA MSSO)
for providing helpful comments on an earlier draft of this
manuscript.

Appendix A. Data mining algorithms
A.1. The GPS method [3]
The GPS method used here was a SAS/IML implementation of the algorithm described by DuMouchel, provided by
Dr. Ivan Zorych (Rutgers University Department of Statistics)
and Prof. David Madigan (Columbia University). This is an
empirical Bayesian procedure that estimates two association
measures: the Empirical Bayes Geometric Mean (EBGM), and
the lower 5% percentile of the posterior distribution (EB05).
The input dataset contains both the matrix of Nab values for
all drug/adverse event combinations considered, and their
expected values under statistical independence, Eab , computed as:

Eab =

S

Nai Ni
i=1

Ni

b

Rab =

NNab
.
Na Nb

.

(1)

A.2. The PRR method [2,4]
For a given drug/adverse event combination, the PRR method
described by Evans et al. generates both the Proportional
Reporting Ratio (PRR) value:
Nab (ÑNa )
Na (Ñb Nab )

,

(2)

2 , the associated 2 -value; a detailed expression 2
And ab
ab
is given by Banks et al. Following the recommendations of
Evans et al., we impose the minimum case count restriction
Nab ≥ 3, and SDRs are generated for drug/event combina2 ≥ 4. Since 2 should be distributed
tions with Pab ≥ 2 and ab
ab
2 ≥ 4 corapproximately as 2 with one degree of freedom, ab
responds approximately to a 5% signiﬁcance level.

(3)

The Statistical Unexpectedness Uab is the reciprocal of the
probability of observing a value as extreme as or more extreme
than Nab under the statistical independence model. That is,
Uab is deﬁned as:

⎧
1
⎪
⎨ P{n ≥ N } if Rab > 1;
ab
Uab =
1
⎪
⎩
if Rab ≥ 1;

(4)

P{n ≤ Nab }

where P{ε} denotes the cumulative hypergeometric probability associated with the event ε. Since positive associations are
of substantially greater interest than negative associations –
in particular, since Rab ≥ 1 is equivalent to Pab ≥ 1, the standard
PRR detection conditions exclude negative associations – the
results presented here are based entirely on the log positive Statistical Unexpectedness, +
, deﬁned as the log of the upper
ab
tail probability:
+
= log 10
ab

Here, the superscripts indicate levels in an S-level stratiﬁcation based on age, gender and year of FDA report date, as
recommended by Szarfman et al. [6]. Following DuMouchel’s
recommendations, these matrices were based on all drugs
with Na ≥ 100 and all adverse events with Nb ≥ 100. Drug/event
combinations generate SDRs if their computed EB05 value is
at least 2 [6].

Pab =

The urn model (URN) method generates two characterizations
for a drug/adverse event combination: the Reporting Ratio and
the Statistical Unexpectedness. The Reporting Ratio Rab is the
ratio of the observed value of Nab to its expected value under
a statistical independence model that assumes no association
between the drug and the adverse event, and it is given by:



1
P{Nab }



= −log 10 P{n ≥ Nab }

(5)

The URN method generates an SDR for a drug/event combination if this log positive Statistical Unexpectedness value
exceeds a threshold deﬁned by a Bonferroni-corrected 5% signiﬁcance threshold. Speciﬁcally, +
> log 10 (NAE /˛) where NAE
ab
is the total number of adverse events for which Nab ≥ 1 and ˛
is the signiﬁcance level (here, ˛ = 0.05). Working with positive
Statistical Unexpectedness values corresponds to imposing
the restriction Rab > 1; as noted, this restriction limits consideration to positive associations, as do the GPS restriction
EB05 ≥ 2 and the PRR restriction PRR ≥ 2. Thus, all three methods considered here seek to detect adverse events exhibiting
positive associations with a given drug that are signiﬁcant at
the 5% level.

references

[1] CERTs Risk Assessment Workshop Participants, Risk
assessment of drugs, biologics and therapeutic devices:
present and future issues, Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 12
(2003) 653–662.
[2] D. Banks, E.J. Woo, D.R. Burwen, P. Perucci, M.M. Braun, R.
Ball, Comparing data mining methods on the VAERS
database, Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 14 (2005) 601–609.
[3] W. Dumouchel, Bayesian data mining in large frequency
tables, with an application to the FDA spontaneous
reporting system, Am. Stat. 53 (1999) 177–202.
[4] S.J.W. Evans, P.C. Waller, S. Davis, Use of proportional
reporting ratios (PRRs) for signal generation from

i n t e r n a t i o n a l j o u r n a l o f m e d i c a l i n f o r m a t i c s 7 8 ( 2 0 0 9 ) e97–e103

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

spontaneous adverse drug reaction reports,
Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 10 (2001) 483–486.
A.M. Hochberg, S.J. Reisinger, R.K. Pearson, D.J. O’Hara, K.
Hall, Using data mining to predict safety actions from FDA
adverse event reporting system data, Drug Information
Journal 41 (2007) 633–643.
A. Szarfman, S.G. Machado, R.T. O’Neill, Use of screening
algorithms and computer systems to efﬁciently signal
higher-than-expected combinations of drugs and events in
the US FDA’s spontaneous reports database, Drug Saf. 25
(2002) 381–392.
J. Almenoff, J.M. Tonning, A.L. Gould, A. Szarfman, M.
Hauben, R. Oullet-Hellstrom, R. Ball, K. Hornbuckle, L.
Walsh, C. Yee, S.T. Sacks, N. Yuen, V. Patadia, M. Blum, M.
Johnston, C. Gerrits, H. Seifert, K. Lacroix, Perspectives on
the use of data mining in pharmaco-vigilance, Drug Saf. 28
(2005) 981–1007.
M. Hauben, D. Madigan, C.M. Gerrits, L. Walsh, E.P. Van
Puijenbroek, The role of data mining in pharmacovigilance,
Expert Opin. Drug Saf. 4 (2005) 929–948.
E.G. Brown, Effects of coding dictionary on signal generation,
Drug Saf. 25 (2002) 445–452.

e103

[10] E. Heeley, L.V. Wilton, S.A.W. Shakir, Automated signal
generation in prescription-event monitoring, Drug Saf. 25
(2002) 423–432.
[11] A. Bate, M. Lindquist, I.R. Edwards, S. Olsson, R. Orre, A.
Lansner, R.M. DeFreitas, A Bayesian neural network method
for adverse drug reaction signal generation, Eur. J. Clin.
Pharmacol. 54 (1998) 315–321.
[12] Bayesian Binary Regression Software, available from the
website http://stat.rutgers.edu/∼madigan/BBR, 2005.
[13] MedDRA, Introductory Guide MedDRA Version 10.0,
document MSSO-DI-6003-10.0.0, March 2007.
[14] MedDRA, Introductory Guide for Standardised MedDRA
Queries (SMQs) Version 10.0, MSS0-DI-6226-10.0.1, March
2007.
[15] A.M. Hochberg, M. Hauben, R.K. Pearson, D.J. O’Hara, S.J.
Reisinger, D.I. Goldsmith, A.L. Gould, D. Madigan, An
evaluation of three signal detection algorithms using a
highly inclusive reference event database, Drug Saf., in
press.
[16] D.W. Hosmer, S. Lemeshow, Applied Logistic Regression, 2nd
ed., Wiley, 2000.
[17] Insightful Corporation, S-Plus 6 Guide to Statistics v. 1, 2001.

