Toxicology 321 (2014) 62–72

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Toxicology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/toxicol

Construction and analysis of a human hepatotoxicity database
suitable for QSAR modeling using post-market safety data
Xiao Zhu, Naomi L. Kruhlak ∗
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, 10903 New Hampshire Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 20993, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 21 March 2014
Accepted 28 March 2014
Available online 8 April 2014
Keywords:
Drug-induced liver injury
Predictive toxicology
QSAR
Post-market safety

a b s t r a c t
Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is one of the most common drug-induced adverse events (AEs) leading
to life-threatening conditions such as acute liver failure. It has also been recognized as the single most
common cause of safety-related post-market withdrawals or warnings. Efforts to develop new predictive methods to assess the likelihood of a drug being a hepatotoxicant have been challenging due to
the complexity and idiosyncrasy of clinical manifestations of DILI. The FDA adverse event reporting system (AERS) contains post-market data that depict the morbidity of AEs. Here, we developed a scalable
approach to construct a hepatotoxicity database using post-market data for the purpose of quantitative
structure–activity relationship (QSAR) modeling. A set of 2029 unique and modelable drug entities with
13,555 drug-AE combinations was extracted from the AERS database using 37 hepatotoxicity-related
query preferred terms (PTs). In order to determine the optimal classiﬁcation scheme to partition positive from negative drugs, a manually-curated DILI calibration set composed of 105 negatives and 177
positives was developed based on the published literature. The ﬁnal classiﬁcation scheme combines
hepatotoxicity-related PT data with supporting information that optimize the predictive performance
across the calibration set. Data for other toxicological endpoints related to liver injury such as liver
enzyme abnormalities, cholestasis, and bile duct disorders, were also extracted and classiﬁed. Collectively, these datasets can be used to generate a battery of QSAR models that assess a drug’s potential to
cause DILI.
Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

1. Introduction
A drug that causes hepatotoxicity, even if only rarely, may be
removed from clinical use since exposure of millions of patients to
such a drug increases this risk to an unacceptable level. For pharmaceutical companies this can lead to devastating ﬁnancial losses
while for patients it means that, while being protected from a drug’s
toxicological consequences, they will no longer have access to its

Abbreviations: DILIN, Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network; PDR, Physician’s Desk
Reference; AE, adverse event; FAERS, FDA Adverse Event Reporting System; ESignal,
Empirica Signal; MGPS, multi-item gamma-Poisson shrinker; MedDRA, Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities; NW-EBGM, N-weighted average empirical Bayes
geometric mean; SOC, system organ class; PT, preferred term; DRAE, drug-related
adverse effects; BDD, bile duct disorders; LEA, liver enzyme abnormalities; CHOL,
cholestasis; LD, liver damage; CT, clinical traits; BE, blood effects; MDC, mostDILI-concern; LDC, less-DILI-concern; NDC, no-DILI-concern; BD, benzodiazepine
derivatives; DD, dihydropyridine derivatives; FLQ, ﬂuoroquinolones; NRTI, nucleoside/tide reverse transcriptase inhibitor; PKI, protein kinase inhibitor; PI, protease
inhibitor.
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 301 796 1691.
E-mail address: Naomi.Kruhlak@fda.hhs.gov (N.L. Kruhlak).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2014.03.009
0300-483X/Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

therapeutic beneﬁt. From a regulatory perspective, drug-induced
liver injury (DILI) has been the leading reason for the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) to withdraw or suspend a drug from the
market or request that its manufacturers add warnings to the drug
label (Kaplowitz, 2005). The broad health implications of DILI and
resulting negative effects in patient outcome have prompted many
studies aiming to better predict the detrimental effects of drugs
on the liver. However, the mechanistic complexity of DILI poses
many challenges in developing reliable safety assessment methods
to universally apply during the drug development process.
To address toxicological concerns and minimize both health and
ﬁnancial risks, drug-related adverse effects (DRAE) have been an
area of active research by the pharmaceutical industry and regulatory bodies alike. Current efforts include the development of
experimental approaches designed to examine biomarkers, phenotypes, and/or other factors associated with DRAE (Mendrick and
Daniels, 2007; Tujios and Fontana, 2011; Rouse et al., 2012). Though
useful in early detection, the cost barriers and challenges in modeling a complex multifactorial phenomenon limit the applicability
of these tests to a few chemicals over a limited duration of exposure. In addition, given its mechanistic complexity, hepatotoxicity

X. Zhu, N.L. Kruhlak / Toxicology 321 (2014) 62–72

may not be seen in model systems or clinical trials yet it emerges
in post-market observations in the larger and more diverse patient
population, as in the case of troglitazone (Jaeschke, 2007), which
was withdrawn from the US market in 2000. Acetaminophen continues to be widely available across worldwide markets despite
being known for causing liver toxicity when overdosed, leading
to its recognition as the most common cause of liver failure in
the United States (Ghabril et al., 2010). However, in the case of
acetaminophen, it is generally well-tolerated at prescribed doses
and its toxicity at higher doses is well-characterized, leading to it
being considered to have an acceptable risk–beneﬁt ratio. Unlike
the dose-dependent property of predictable toxicities, idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity is unrelated to dose and has a variable latency
period ranging from a few days up to a year. For example, in certain patients phenytoin can induce fever, rash, and eosinophilia,
symptoms characteristic of hypersensitivity syndrome, a rare
but important adverse response that can lead to hepatocellular,
cholestatic, or mixed liver injury (Smythe and Umstead, 1989). This
holds true for all routes of administration, even for topically applied
compounds since the drug can be absorbed through the skin and
enter the systemic circulation. There continues to be pressure to
develop new techniques for toxicological assessments.
Post-marketing safety assessment and surveillance have largely
relied on spontaneous reporting system (SRS) databases to which
reports are generally ﬁled on a voluntary basis with the exception of
pharmaceutical companies who are obligated to report DRAE suspects as they are observed. The US FDA’s Adverse Event Reporting
System (FAERS), which receives voluntary adverse event reports
from healthcare professionals and consumers, has been one of the
most prominent repositories of this type and has proven useful in
detection of concealed drug-AE associations (Hauben, 2004; Chen
et al., 2008; Elashoff et al., 2011). Information captured within
the database includes the generic name of the drug suspected
of causing the AE, reported AEs, concomitant drugs, indications,
and limited demographic information on the patient, making it
amenable to data extraction and analysis. Identiﬁcation of the
AE is tethered to the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
(MedDRA) (Brown et al., 1999) terminology and associated hierarchy. Because FDA does not require proof of causal relationship
in submission of adverse events, single reports alone unreliable.
Therefore, suspected causal associations are typically detected statistically. Several frequentist measures have been applied to detect
DRAE signals from FAERS such as the relative reporting ratio (RRR),
proportional reporting ratio (PRR), and reporting odds-ratio (ROR).
These methods are fundamentally the same in that they deﬁne the
rate of incidence derived from the reported suspected associations
relative to a baseline rate. Typically, a score of 3.0 is interpreted to
mean that the DRAE occurs three times as frequently as the baseline. One weakness of frequentist approaches is that they are prone
to yielding extreme values, thereby generating more false positives. This limitation is alleviated by the availability of Bayesian
approaches (Ahmed et al., 2009), among which is the multi-item
gamma-Poisson shrinker (MGPS) (Szarfman et al., 2004) currently
used by the FDA for DRAE signal detection. MGPS combines
disproportionality analysis with Bayesian shrinkage by computing the expected probability distribution using known data to
identify higher-than-expected AE-drug relationships and systematically “shrinking” volatile signals exhibited with small number of
reported events. Because signal shrinking also reduces the rate of
false signals due to low AE reporting, MGPS is considered a more
conservative method when compared to frequentist approaches in
that it produces a lower number of false positives (Almenoff et al.,
2006).
One of the advantages of using post-market data is the detection of idiosyncratic toxicity, which typically manifests long after
the initial exposure and when intrinsic mechanisms are combined

63

with critical risk factors, whether genetic or acquired. The biggest
challenge to using SRS databases, however, stems from the much
discussed under-reporting or biased reporting in general practice
(Moride et al., 1997; Goldman, 1998; Gale, 2009), requiring additional considerations when using this data for determining causal
associations. Still, integrating post-market data that reﬂect longterm exposure by the population at large is an important step in
representing DILI, and usage of these data as the basis of predictive
in silico quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR) models has shown success in the past (Matthews et al., 2009; Ursem
et al., 2009). Efforts to develop new model training databases, using
drug structures linked to post-market data, are extended in this
research by combining the data with information from drug labels
and the published literature. Here we present a method to generate a database suitable for QSAR analysis using an improved
and scalable data collection, validation, and structural classiﬁcation
workﬂow.
2. Materials and methods
The primary objective of this research was to devise and apply a scalable protocol
to harvest and transform FAERS data for use in computational modeling of druginduced liver effects. The overall approach was to (1) selectively extract data for
liver injury endpoints from the large amount of records that are present within
FAERS, (2) ﬁlter the extracted data to remove non-modelable entities and collapse
records for the same active pharmaceutical ingredient, and (3) develop and apply a
classiﬁcation scheme for hepatotoxicity across the entire data set.
2.1. Data mining
The data mining procedure is summarized in Fig. 1. All post-market data through
August 10, 2012 were downloaded from FAERS using the web-based tool EmpiricaTM
Signal (ESignal). Only ‘suspect’ drug-AE pairs were considered; drug-AE pairs for
concomitant drugs were excluded. Raw report counts, as well as MGPS’ empirical
Bayes geometric mean (EBGM) and stratiﬁed PRR scores for all drug-AE combinations were downloaded. A list of exclusion entities was empirically developed
and applied to remove natural products, large peptides, complex mixtures, metalcontaining compounds, and other non-modelable entities. Drug products containing
the same active pharmaceutical ingredient but with different drug-release formulations were truncated to the parent drug.
Drugs with AEs related to the different endpoints describing liver injury, as
deﬁned at the MedDRA (Brown et al., 1999) preferred term (PT) level, were extracted
with their respective EBGM and PRR scores. Entities without any drug-AE entries
related to speciﬁc endpoints were given scores of 0 for those particular endpoints.
2.2. Deﬁnition of endpoints
Four groups of endpoints were used to characterize liver injury: liver damage
(LD), cholestasis (CHOL), liver enzyme abnormalities (LEA), and bile duct disorders
(BDD) with the primary endpoint being LD and others as supporting endpoints.
Here we deﬁne them as such, in the expectation that models predicting them may
be used in conjunction with LD models, where they would play a less signiﬁcant,
but still important role in determining risk for DILI. Each group was characterized
using PTs selected from the MedDRA hierarchy version 15.0. The speciﬁc PTs selected
are listed in Table 1. For LD, these terms include disease states strongly associated
with the endpoint as determined by a hepatotoxicity expert in an unblinded fashion, but also expanded terms such as “hepatic atrophy, calciﬁcation, cirrhosis, cyst,
dysplasia, ﬁbrosis, infection, lesion, mass, necrosis, rupture, sequestration”, “hepatomegaly”, “chronic hepatic failure”, “traumatic liver injury”, and “liver disorder”
that are less closely-related but still included to increase sensitivity. In addition to
the four groups of endpoints described above, EBGM and PRR scores for a series of
supporting PTs were harvested and considered for the purpose of amplifying the
LD signal. These terms included investigational outcomes and secondary adverse
effects linked to LD. The ﬁrst group of terms referred to as “blood terms” encompasses liver injury-related biomarkers detectable through serological examination,
including those pertaining to Hy’s law (Guidance for Industry, FDA (Zimmerman,
1999)), and the second group of terms labeled “clinical traits” represents clinical
traits often associated with liver injury. PTs for “blood terms” include “blood albumin abnormal”, “blood alkaline phosphatase abnormal”, “blood bilirubin abnormal”,
“transaminases abnormal”, and “gamma-glutamyltransferase abnormal” and those
for “clinical traits” include “drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms”,
“lymphocyte stimulation test positive”, “body temperature increased”, “jaundice”,
“hepatobiliary scan abnormal”, “X-ray hepatobiliary abnormal”, “hepatic enzyme
abnormal”, and “liver function test abnormal”. Terms included in both of these two
groups originate from the “investigational” system organ class (SOC) of the MedDRA
hierarchy.

64

X. Zhu, N.L. Kruhlak / Toxicology 321 (2014) 62–72

Table 1
Preferred terms (PTs) selected to describe four liver injury endpoints.
Endpoint

PTs

Liver damage

Acute hepatic failure
Autoimmune hepatitis
Cholestatic liver injury
Chronic hepatic failure
Coma hepatic
Cytolytic hepatitis
Hepatic atrophy
Hepatic calciﬁcation
Hepatic cirrhosis
Hepatic cyst
Hepatic dysplasia
Hepatic encephalopathy
Hepatic failure
Hepatic ﬁbrosis
Hepatic infection
Hepatic lesion
Hepatic mass
Hepatic necrosis
Hepatic rupture

Liver enzyme
abnormalities

Alanine aminotransferase
abnormal
Alanine aminotransferase
increased
Aspartate
aminotransferase
abnormal
Aspartate
aminotransferase
increased
Gammaglutamyltransferase
abnormal
Gammaglutamyltransferase
increased

Cholestasis

Cholestasis
Cholestatic liver injury
Cholestatic pruritus
Hepatitis cholestatic
Jaundice cholestatic

Bile duct disorders

Biopsy bile duct abnormal
Bile duct necrosis
Bile duct obstruction
Bile duct stone
Bile duct pressure
increased
Biliary cirrhosis
Biliary cirrhosis primary
Biliary dilatation

Hepatic sequestration
Hepatic steatosis
Hepatitis
Hepatitis acute
Hepatitis fulminant
Hepatitis toxic
Hepatocellular injury
Hepatomegaly
Hepatotoxicity
Liver disorder
Liver injury
Mitochondrial hepatopathy
Mixed liver injury
Non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis
Peliosis hepatis
Subacute hepatic failure
Traumatic liver injury
Jaundice hepatocellular

3.1. Data mining statistics
Hepatic enzyme decreased
Hepatic enzyme increased

Liver function test
abnormal
Transaminases abnormal

Transaminases increased

Haemobilia
Perforation bile duct
Vanishing bile duct
syndrome
Cholangitis
Cholangitis acute
Cholangitis chronic
Ultrasound biliary tract
abnormal
Jaundice extrahepatic
obstructive

Both the pre-calculated PRR and EBGM scores were obtained from ESignal. For
each drug, an N-weighted average of EBGM scores, EBGMNW , for all PTs within a
particular endpoint type was calculated using corresponding EBGM scores [s1 , s2 ,
. . ., sn ] and report counts [c1 , c2 , . . ., cn ] for each PT:
i=1

Comparison of binary predicted activities and actual activities was performed
using Cooper statistics (Cooper et al., 1979). Brieﬂy, predictive performance was
evaluated using a classic 2x2 contingency table (Fig. 2) containing counts of true
positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false positives (FP), and false negatives (FN).
Statistics such as sensitivity (Sens), speciﬁcity (Spec), positive predictive value (PPV),
negative predictive value (NPV), and accuracy (ACC) are deﬁned as shown in Fig. 2.

3. Results

2.3. Scoring

n

2.5. Performance statistics

Hepatic enzyme abnormal

Biliary ﬁstula

EBGMNW =

acute liver failure, or (3) it has been withdrawn or suspended in either the US or
European markets. To generate a list of negatives, approximately 200 compounds
were randomly selected from the database and manually curated using PubMed
and FDA’s MedWatch. A drug was assigned to be negative for hepatotoxicity if it
had been on the market for more than 5 years (based on the Physician’s Desk Reference (PDR)) and if no alerting publications or warnings related to liver injury
were found using the search words, “liver injury”, “liver”, “liver failure”, “hepatotoxicity”, “cholestasis”, and “cholestatic” in PubMed and “liver”, “hepatotoxicity”,
“hepatotoxic”, “hepatic”, “cholestatic”, and “cholestasis” in MedWatch. PDR data
was extracted from historical data compiled from yearly PDR publications ranging
from 1970 to 2012. The calibration data set is provided as Supplemental Data Table
S1 and in sdf format accompanying this publication.

ci si

n

where n is the total report count.
2.4. Construction of the calibration set
The calibration set was constructed of known hepatotoxicants and nonhepatotoxicants. Drugs with known hepatotoxicity effects were extracted from
previous publications, which consolidate data from US and European toxicity registries. A drug is labeled to be hepatotoxic if (1) it is present in the US drug-induced
liver injury network (DILIN) (Fontana et al., 2009), or (2) it is known to cause

The FDA currently uses the signal detection engine ESignal
to organize and monitor the millions of drug-AE combinations
that exist within AERS and generate statistical scores for drugAE combinations for detection of unexpected associations between
drugs and AEs. ESignal reports several disproportionality statistics,
including ROR and PRR. Of particular interest was that it also implements the multi-item gamma-Poisson shrinker (MGPS) algorithm
developed by DuMouchel and collaborators (DuMouchel, 1999;
Almenoff et al., 2003) to evaluate the relationship between drug
exposure and outcome events. It uses a Mantel–Haenszel (Mantel
and Haenszel, 1959) approach to stratify the counts in order to identify dependence on demographics and to account for the instability
associated with small counts. Indeed, one major advantage of MGPS
is the suppression of erratically inﬂated signals for drug-AEs with
small number of reports (Almenoff et al., 2006), a common problem
with frequentist approaches.
For efﬁciency and amenability considerations, our ﬁrst step was
to download all DRAE data. A total of 1,938,086 drug-AE pairs,
covering 14,571 MedDRA PTs, were obtained from ESignal. A total
of 1540 exclusion terms corresponding to non-modelable entities
such as drug mixtures of two or more ingredients, herbs, macromolecules (enzymes, antibodies, large peptides), and inorganics
and drugs containing inorganic elements were empirically determined and applied to the original list yielding 1,338,038 modelable
drug-AE pairs. Drug-AE pair counts for individual endpoints are
shown in Table 2. It is worth noting that LD contains the most
drug-AE pairs (13,555) whereas BDD has the least (1814). The LEA
endpoint contains the highest number of reports (153,167) and the
highest report-to-drug-AE ratio of 21.40.
The drug-AE pairs were grouped into therapeutic classes deﬁned
within ESignal for analysis. In Fig. 3, the percentage of drug-AE pairs
for each therapeutic class is presented for both the original data and
modelable set. A slight upward shift in proportion is observed with
cardiovascular, infectious disease, and CNS drugs. However, acrossthe-board proportions were well maintained indicating that the
ﬁlters do not signiﬁcantly affected the overall drug class distribution.
The list of PTs used to deﬁne the four liver-injury-related endpoints is shown in Table 1. Previous research from our group also
included jaundice as one of the primary endpoints (Ursem et al.,
2009); however, due to the ambiguity behind the mechanisms leading to the manifestation of this adverse event, we reassigned the
component terms for this endpoint as members of the “clinical

X. Zhu, N.L. Kruhlak / Toxicology 321 (2014) 62–72

65

Fig. 1. Overview of FAERS datamining. (1) Drug-adverse event data was extracted using Empirica Signal including only generic names of suspect drugs. (2) Redundant
chemical entities are merged and those deemed non-modelable excluded. (3) Preferred terms (PTs) describing the endpoints of interest were developed and used to extract
and group data to each endpoint. (4) For each drug, a weight-of-evidence average was calculated against each endpoint.

Table 2
Statistics on adverse event endpoints.
Endpoint

# PTs

# Drug-AEs

# Reports

Reports/Drug-AEs

Liver damage
Liver enzyme
Cholestasis
Bile duct

37
13
5
17

13,555
7159
2213
1814

141,404
153,167
18,894
5354

10.43
21.40
8.54
2.95

PTs: preferred terms; AE: adverse event.

traits” (CT) group of supporting endpoints for the LD endpoint. The
CT endpoints encompass terms that are often associated with liver
injury patterns. A second group of supporting terms, deﬁned as
“blood effects” (BE), was selected to represent terms related to serological evaluations. The speciﬁc terms are described in Section 2.2
3.2. Liver damage classiﬁcation schemes
Using post-market data to monitor for hepatotoxic signals of
a drug has long been a focus of the FDA. In 2006, Evans and
collaborators (Evans et al., 2001) outlined through empirical observations a signal threshold of PRR ≥ 2 (2 ≥ 4, N ≥ 3) where Szarfman
(Szarfman et al., 2002) proposed a threshold of MGPS’ EB05 ≥ 2.0,
where EB05 is the lower bound of the 90% conﬁdence interval of
the geometric mean (EBGM). Though suitable for identiﬁcation of
strong signals, EB05 as a metric for signal classiﬁcation poses a high

Fig. 2. Contingency table for a binary classiﬁer and performance calculations. TP:
true positive; TN: true negative; FP: false positive; FN: false negative; Sens: sensitivity; Spec: speciﬁcity; PPV: positive predictive value; NPV: negative predictive
value; ACC: accuracy.

risk of missing potential signals (Yang et al., 2008) and therefore
may not be suitable as a training set activity classiﬁer. Indeed, there
is currently no true standard in the deﬁnition of a signal. A survey
(Deshpande et al., 2010) comparing published threshold criteria for
different signal detection methods revealed discrepancies across
the published literature. Because the use of the EBGM score in signal
detection has not been previously examined, here we systematically explore the use of EBGM, for increased sensitivity in signal
detection versus EB05 alone and for intrinsically more robust signal
detection than PRR. EBGM is the adjusted observed/expected ratio
calculated by MGPS, whose 90% conﬁdence interval is bounded by
EB05 and EB95, respectively. We have developed and evaluated the
performance of an activity classiﬁcation algorithm based on this
metric.

Fig. 3. Percentage of drug-AE pairs as a function of therapeutic class. Percentage
occurrence was calculated using total drug-AE pairs count as the denominator and
plotted for raw list of entities extracted from FAERS and that of modelable entities.
Plot excludes data bars for class deﬁnition of “unclassiﬁed” or “various”.

66

X. Zhu, N.L. Kruhlak / Toxicology 321 (2014) 62–72

Fig. 4. Percentage of hepatotoxicants within the calibration set at different EBGM
ranges. Percent of positives (solid) are plotted with negatives (patterned) along with
the total number of drug entities (line).

Fig. 5. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) plot of the performance of disproportionate reporting scores for the classiﬁcation of hepatotoxicants and
non-hepatotoxicants over the calibration set. Each data point represents a score
cutoff ranging from 1.0 to 3.0.

As there is a lack of gold-standard through which we can quantitatively optimize a classiﬁcation scheme based on post-marketing
data, the ﬁrst step was to create a reference database of known
hepatotoxicants and non-hepatotoxicants. A set of 177 known hepatotoxicants was extracted from a previous compilation by Suzuki
et al. (2010) that correspond to those that are either (1) present in
the US drug-induced liver injury network (DILIN), (2) implicated as
the cause of acute liver failure, or (3) withdrawn or suspended in
either the US or European markets. This list of positives was combined with 105 known non-hepatotoxicants, which were based on
PubMed and MedWatch consultations of randomly selected entities (see Section 2.4). In short, these drugs were selected randomly
from the training set list, have been on the market for more than
5 years, and are characterized by a lack of conclusive report or
reference in PubMed and FDA MedWatch. The complete set of
282 positive and negative drugs formed the calibration set and
is provided as Supporting Information. These entries were then
matched against the master list of drug-AEs and respective data
were extracted for each drug including N-weighted average EBGM
(NW-EBGM) scores for the LD endpoint and supporting groups of
terms. This dataset was used for the development of a LD classiﬁcation algorithm.
To determine optimal classiﬁcation schemes for the LD endpoint, we optimized a decision algorithm to best classify the
actives and inactives within the calibration set. To compare the
performance characteristics of different signal detection methods,
we initially considered a range of cutoff values based on the PRRNW
scores and EBGMNW scores, which are N-weighted averages based
on the number of underlying reports. Though the use of the EB05
metric was previously cited by FDA due to its narrow conﬁdence
interval, we felt that a more conservative and intrinsically more
sensitive metric, EBGM, was better capable of capturing subtle
toxic manifestations to yield an active/inactive ratio suitable for
integration in QSAR model systems used for regulatory support,
where sensitivity is a critical parameter. The range of applicability
of the EBGMNW scoring scheme was examined by binning values
for calibration set drug entities and determining the percentage of
true positive and negatives in each bin. As shown in Fig. 4, a high
EBGMNW score is indeed correlated with true hepatotoxicants,
conﬁrming the validity of such a metric for signal detection.
Although higher EBGMNW values yield higher conﬁdence for a positive call, applying a high EBGMNW threshold to deﬁne a positive
also reduces sensitivity, which is counter to our ultimate goal of
developing a QSAR training set and model. Therefore, we decided
to be more tolerant of false positives and focused further analysis

on the EBGMNW range of 1.0–3.0, a decision that, furthermore,
accommodates perceived false positives that may be the result of
misidentiﬁcation during our calibration set development process
(i.e., a lack of positive experimental data does not necessarily
equate to non-hepatotoxicant status). In Fig. 5, it is shown via
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) plot that the EBGM scoring
scheme consistently outperforms the PRR scoring scheme within
the cutoff range of 1.0–3.0. It has been discussed before (Yang
et al., 2008) that the PRR metric is more sensitive whereas EBGM is
more stable of an indicator for AE signals. Speciﬁcally, the concern
has been that PRR is less stable for small report counts. This is
largely due to the fact that, where PRR does not, MGPS corrects for
artiﬁcially inﬂated values caused by small number of reports.
Another consideration for the decision algorithm was inclusion
of two groups of supporting terms, as deﬁned in Section 2.2, corresponding to serological biomarkers and clinical manifestations
related to liver injury. As potential ampliﬁers of weaker primary
LD signals, we integrated scores for these supporting terms into the
classiﬁcation algorithm by considering only the highest EBGMNW
score with N ≥ 3 from the group of PTs describing each endpoint.
Three schemes, each consisting of different combinations of
classiﬁer parameters with the AE data, were tested for their ability to partition positive from negative drugs for the LD endpoint.
Accuracy was assessed and optimized by comparison with the calibration set, with the intent of applying the optimal classiﬁcation
scheme to the entire dataset of 2029 drugs. Test results for each
classiﬁcation scheme are shown in Fig. 6. We ﬁrst considered using
the EBGMNW score as the general criterion for classiﬁcation of positives for LD (Scheme 1 of Fig. 6). This yields an optimal EBGMNW
threshold of 1.8 with Sens = 62.71% and Spec = 82.08%. To address
the possibility of false negatives due to weak signals, as discussed in
Section 4.1, we ampliﬁed the original positive signal with information from additional supporting parameters by combining Scheme
1 with the EBGM scores from the Clinical Traits or Blood Effects
groups of terms, yielding Scheme 2. In Scheme 2, if an entity has an
EBGM score between 1.2 and 1.8 it is considered positive if at least
one supporting PT has an EBGM ≥ 1.4 (N ≥ 3). Next, we also explored
whether there is a difference in the count of positive PTs (i.e.: the
number of PTs with EBGM ≥ 2.0) for known hepatotoxicants in consideration of using this information for classiﬁcation. A cutoff value
of 2.0 has been widely used for other disproportionality score systems such as PRR, EB05, and ROR by regulatory bodies for signal
detection. Shown in Fig. 7 are the observed distributions of positive
PT counts for known hepatotoxicants and non-hepatotoxicants in
the calibration set and all modelable drugs extracted from ESignal.

X. Zhu, N.L. Kruhlak / Toxicology 321 (2014) 62–72

67

3.3. Case studies

Fig. 6. Performance of classiﬁcation schemes over the calibration set. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) plot for three schemes are shown. Optimal classiﬁer is
indicated by an arrow and corresponds to Sens = 0.78 and Spec = 0.77.

Fig. 7. Frequency for each count of active PTs. Number of PTs with EBGM satisfying
criteria for “positive” are plotted for the full ensemble of drugs (ﬁlled circle), only
the positives (circle), and only the negatives (triangle).

Clearly seen is the consistently higher occurrence of positive PTs in
known hepatotoxicants. As a result, the ﬁnal classiﬁcation scheme,
Scheme 3, was developed such that if a drug is deemed negative via
Scheme 2 it can be classiﬁed as positive if EBGMNW is between 0.9
and 1.8 and if the number of PTs with EBGM ≥ 2.0 is greater than or
equal to 3. The ﬁnal optimized classiﬁcation algorithm (Fig. 8) for
the LD endpoint is indicated with an arrow in Fig. 6 with performance over the calibration set of Sens = 0.78 and Spec = 0.77.

Here we present four examples of correct and incorrect classiﬁcation depicting the strengths and potential shortfalls of the
EBGM-based classiﬁer.
Levoﬂoxacin (TP). In this interesting case, the hepatotoxic potential of Levoﬂoxacin would not have been detected due to its
EBGMNW of 1.74, which is below the automatic threshold for a
positive (1.80). However, the signal was enhanced because the
drug exhibited a total of six positive PTs: cholestatic liver injury
(EBGM = 2.19, N = 4), cytolytic hepatitis (3.02, 48), hepatitis acute
(2.38, 22), hepatotoxicity (2.78, 56), liver injury (2.56, 32), and
mixed liver injury (3.21, 6). A number of other individual PTs were
also close to 2.0: hepatic atrophy (1.82, 4), hepatitis (1.78, 135),
hepatitis fulminant (1.94, 14), and hepatitis toxic (1.74, 8). With a
total of 649 reports, the above endpoints account for 51% (329/649)
of all counts, leaving room for endpoints to downgrade the overall
EBGMNW score. This example is representative of our strategy to
raise sensitivity while maintaining high speciﬁcity by accounting
for white noise within the data.
Ampicillin (TN). This drug exhibits an EBGMNW of 0.60, which
is below the baseline. It also has no positive PTs with the highest EBGM conferred to liver disorder at 1.12 (N = 3). Based on the
MedWatch image of the original reports, two of the patients were
aged 82 and 92; information on the third was absent. In addition
to being of advanced age, the patients were taking multiple therapeutic agents and concomitantly reported a multitude of adverse
effects unrelated to liver injury.
Vitamin C (FP). Ascorbic acid exists in abundance both in regularly consumed produce and also in dietary supplements. It is
perhaps one of the few compounds that are universally recognized
to be beneﬁciary to health. Recently demonstrated is its antioxidative role in animal models when exposed to toxic compounds
(Al-Attar, 2011; Awadalla, 2012; Ozkan et al., 2012). Furthermore,
an overview of the hepatoprotective functions of ascorbic acid was
discussed in a recent review (Adikwu and Deo, 2013). However, calculations using post-market adverse event data yield an EBGMNW
score of 2.78, which is well above the baseline levels and indicates
a clear signal for cause of concern. The underlying contributors to
this signal are acute hepatic failure (EBGM = 4.51, N = 4), hepatic
failure (4.51, 4), and hepatitis (2.1, 6). The reason for the report of
vitamin C as suspect in these adverse effects may be due to several factors. First, vitamin C is a widely used dietary supplement
with known health beneﬁts. This can lead to frequent appearances in FAERS reports in combination with other drugs, resulting
in a higher chance of confounded signals. Second, considering its
health beneﬁts, reporting parties may deliberately avert reporting
of vitamin C as cause for AE, thereby amplifying underreporting
scenarios. Underreporting and biased reporting have been previously recognized as a problem in spontaneous reporting databases
(Lopez-Gonzalez et al., 2009). This example illustrates the need for

Fig. 8. Overview of Classiﬁcation Scheme 3 for the identiﬁcation of hepatotoxicants. Blood: blood effects group of terms. Clin: clinical traits group of terms. Each input
compound is evaluated by the criteria outlined in each node to determine its susceptibility for DILI.

68

X. Zhu, N.L. Kruhlak / Toxicology 321 (2014) 62–72

Fig. 9. Occurrence of drugs by therapeutic class as a result of applying our DILI
classiﬁer over all modelable entities.

caution and rationalization as a signal does not necessarily indicate
a causal relationship and further investigation may be necessary.
Naproxen (FN). This widely-used over-the-counter drug has an
EBGMNW of 0.56, which is signiﬁcantly lower than the baseline
level, signifying that statistically it is unlikely to be associated to
liver injury. However, it was recognized to be implicated as the
cause of ALF in the US, Sweden, and Spain with 12 cases (N = 784)
found in the Swedish registry (Suzuki et al., 2010). This compound,
which is a non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug (NSAID), treats
pain, fever, and arthritic pain. Although clinical manifestations of
naproxen-related liver injury are rare (1–3 per 100,000 users) and
usually only result in serum enzyme elevations, increased exposure
of the general public to this class of drugs is such that the absolute
number of cases can be high. Halts in clinical development or even
withdrawal from the market due to hepatotoxicity concerns are not
unknown for this class of drugs (Zimmerman, 1999). Hepatotoxicity of naproxen, a drug structurally inherent of a classic NSAID, is
likely to be attributed to the underlying toxicological properties
of this class with effects ranging from off-target pharmacological interactions, disruption of mitochondrial energy production,
immune-mediated toxicity, to interference of hepatobiliary transport of cholephilic compounds (Boelsterli, 2003). As these intrinsic
toxicological mechanisms do not typically become apparent due to
general tolerance or cellular repair mechanisms, when combined
with several critical risk factors can result in idiosyncratic reactions. Here, naproxen presents an ideal example of a statistically
insigniﬁcant occurrence of a drug-induced AE yet one that may
be incriminated due to its wide availability and visibility to the
public.
3.4. Analysis of drug classes
It is well understood that drugs of certain therapeutic classes are
more prone to causing DILI than others (Zimmerman, 1999). This
“class effect” is likely due to a shared proﬁle of not only intended
pharmacological targets, but also off-targets, which is often a consequence of similarities in the drugs’ chemical structures. In order
to gain a broad understanding of such disproportionality, as well
as to validate the use of our classiﬁcation algorithm to correctly
identify such structure-based trends, we compared the negative
and positive proportion of each therapeutic class as deﬁned using
our classiﬁcation method. As shown in Fig. 9, there is a marked
elevation in the proportion of Immunological & Neoplastic, Infectious Disease, and Muscle Relaxant therapeutics in the positive set,
implying that drugs in these classes are more likely to be associated
with DILI than those in other classes such as Gastro and Metabolic,
Renal and Reproductive, Respiratory, and Skin therapeutics. To

investigate whether our approach to mining and classifying postmarket data can effectively predict structural class effects, with a
view to developing a QSAR training set, we identiﬁed speciﬁc pharmacologic classes within each therapeutic class and determined the
total number of examples, as well as the number of those that were
classiﬁed as positives. Members of structural classes containing 10
or more positively classiﬁed compounds are listed in Table 3. Overall, this corresponds to 51% (20/39) of benzodiazepine derivatives,
61% (11/18) of dihydropyridine derivatives, 58% (11/19) of ﬂuoroquinolones, 100% (11/11) of nucleoside/tide reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NRTI), 69% (11/16) of protein kinase inhibitors, and 100%
(10/10) of protease inhibitors. To identify whether these are truly
positives, each drug was used as query against the Pharmapendium
database to identify pre-market and non-FAERS-sourced published
side-effects corresponding to MedDRA® PTs (Brown et al., 1999)
deﬁning liver injury, as listed in Table 1. The search was performed
across FDA approval packages, Mosby’s Drug Consult (Mosby,
2007), and Meyler’s Side Effect of Drugs (Aronson and Dukes, 2006).
For drugs that did not result in any hits, we conducted a search in
the LiverTox database (Hoofnagle et al., 2013), which is an online
resource that compiles data from various sources on DILI. The rate
of correct positive classiﬁcation for each structural class is plotted in Fig. 10. Most drugs that were classiﬁed as positives by our
FAERS-based method were also cited as being associated with liver
injury AEs in these resources. Thirteen out of the 20 benzodiazepine
derivatives, 8 out of the 11 dihydropyridine derivatives, 7 out of the
11 ﬂuoroquinolones, 10 out of the 11 NRTIs, 8 out of the 11 protein
kinase inhibitors, and all 10 protease inhibitors classiﬁed as positive
were previously reported to cause liver injury.
Taking it a step further we studied whether these drug classes
have known ties with hepatotoxicity in the published scientiﬁc
literature. Benzodiazepines as a class have been cited previously
for their intrinsic likelihood for causing liver injury, where several examples have been implicated in causing cholestatic and
hepatocellular toxicity (Kaplowitz, 2005). Though extremely rare,
several dihydropyridines have previously been associated with DILI
(Basile and Mascia, 1999); however, to our knowledge, no class
effect has been proposed in literature. The prevalence of signals
for hepatotoxicity in this class of drugs, as supported by our data,
suggest that these compounds could warrant more attention. Fluoroquinolones have been known for their association with mild,
transient aminotransferase elevation (Ho et al., 2009). However,
a recent publication also linked ﬂuoroquinolones with the much
less common acute liver injury (Orman et al., 2011; Paterson et al.,
2012). Several members of NRTI antiviral agents are known to be
associated with hepatotoxicity (Bonacini et al., 2003) as well as
other organ toxicity, which is vastly attributed to its interference
with mitochondrial functions (Lewis et al., 2003). One example
is abacavir, which can lead to mild hepatotoxicity alone or as a
possible conﬂuent of hypersensitivity (Jones and Nunez, 2012).
Tenofovir, zidovudine, stavudine, didanosine, and lamivudine have
also been deemed to be responsible for causing mitochondrial toxicity, hepatic steatosis, or hypersensitivity (Gupta and Lewis, 2008).
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors represent the majority of the protease
inhibitor family of drugs, which are commonly used to treat cancer
in combination therapies. The general mechanism by which they
act is to selectively block the cell signaling pathway that leads to the
proliferation of malignant cells. They are commonly used in combination therapy with ﬁrst-line chemotherapy agents, and there have
been observations of signiﬁcantly increased risk for liver injury in
patients taking them (Teo et al., 2013).
Taken together, these data identify some well-documented
important class effects and conﬁrm the ability of the FAERS-based
classiﬁer to identify them. Furthermore this supports the use of
such a dataset for global structure–activity relationship modeling
using computational methods.

X. Zhu, N.L. Kruhlak / Toxicology 321 (2014) 62–72

69

Table 3
List of drug therapeutic classes containing 10 or more drugs classiﬁed as positive for liver injury.
Class

Training set total

Classiﬁed
positives

Positive drugs

Benzodiazepine
derivatives (BD)

39

20

Dihydropyridine
derivatives (DD)

18

11

Fluoroquinolones (FLQ)

19

11

Nucleoside/tide
reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (NRTI)

11

11

Protein kinase
inhibitors (PKI)

16

11

Protease inhibitors (PI)

10

10

Bromazepam
Brotizolam
Clobazam
Clorazepate
Clotiazepam
Amlodipine
Azelnidipine
Benidipine
Cilnidipine
Felodipine
Alatroﬂoxacin
Ciproﬂoxacin
Garenoxacin
Gatiﬂoxacin
Moxiﬂoxacin
Abacavir
Didanosine
Emtricitabine
Entecavir
Lamivudine
Axitinib
Crizotinib
Dasatinib
Geﬁtinib
Imatinib
Amprenavir
Atazanavir
Darunavir
Fosamprenavir
Indinavir

Diazepam
Estazolama
Ethyl Loﬂazepate
Etizolam
Flunitrazepam
Isradipine
Lercanidipine
Manidipine
Nicardipine
Nimodipine
Norﬂoxacin
Oﬂoxacin
Pazuﬂoxacin
Sparﬂoxacin
Temaﬂoxacin
Lodenosine
Stavudine
Telbivudine
Tenofovir
Zalcitabine
Lapatinib
Nilotinib
Pazopanib
Sorafenib
Sunitinib
Lopinavir
Nelﬁnavir
Ritonavir
Saquinavir
Tipranavir

Loﬂazepate
Lormetazepam
Midazolam Nitrazepam
Nordazepam

Oxazepam
Prazepam
Quazepam
Temazepam
Triazolam

Nitrendipine

Trovaﬂoxacin

Zidovudine

Vemurafenib

Drugs listed above are highlighted based on the source from which their association with hepatobiliary disorders originates as deﬁned below.Underlined: Meyler. Italicized:
FDA. Bold: Mosby’s Drug Consult.
a
Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network, DILIN.

3.5. Comparisons with drug labels
Previous efforts to detect DILI for the purpose of building a QSAR
training set have included consideration of drug labels (Chen et al.,
2011). The extensive drug review process makes label warnings a
reliable source of DILI data that represent causality, severity, and
incidence rates of the effects. To understand the extent to which
post-marketing data are consistent with drug label information,
and to evaluate the performance of our classiﬁer, we obtained the
list of drugs of “most-DILI-concern” (MDC) and “no-DILI-concern”
(NDC) from the work of Chen et al. (2011). Using a total of 225
drugs that overlapped between our FAERS-based dataset and the
Chen dataset, we calculated how well our classiﬁer discriminated
positives from negatives. This exercise yielded 73% sensitivity and
73% speciﬁcity. With the exclusion of the drugs annotated as “lessDILI-concern” (LDC), the agreement improved to 86% sensitivity
and 74% speciﬁcity for the 145 remaining drugs. LDC drugs correspond to those that contain low severity DILI terms in the “warnings
and precautions” and “adverse reactions” sections of the drug label
(Chen et al., 2011). The improvement in performance supports the
notion that the manifestation of liver toxicity by LDC drugs is clinically less apparent than by MDC drugs in post-market population.
Of the 145 drugs compared, there were 13 FNs (i.e., MDC drugs classiﬁed as negative based on our method). A systematic analysis of
these differing calls was performed to understand the underlying
reason for the discrepancy. FNs are of special interest since a negative call is typically the result of relatively fewer reports for the suite
of AE terms describing LD for that drug. In contrast, FPs (i.e., NDC
drugs classiﬁed as positive based on our method) are anticipated in
some situations and, while undesirable to regulators, are one of the
reasons why post-market surveillance is performed. Of the 13 FN
compounds, four have 15 or less reports in total across all endpoints

and nine have fewer than 500 reports in total. Underreporting is
a possible explanation for this observation, a phenomenon that
is widely acknowledged in voluntary reporting systems such as
FAERS (Lopez-Gonzalez et al., 2009). Another explanation is lack
of data due to how a drug is used in practice. Carbidopa, a FN with
a label that cites risks of liver function abnormalities, is in practice
indicated for combination usage with levodopa, a drug with a long
history of treatment for Parkinson’s disease. In our database there
are 23 drug-AE pairs associated with carbidopa, but all are reported
as part of a combination therapy with either levodopa or with entacapone. This is likely due to the fact that levodopa as a standalone
therapy can cause increased dopamine levels outside of the brain,
causing various side effects (Tolosa et al., 1998). Taken together, this
suggests that the label classiﬁcation from the Chen dataset may be
confounded in this case. In addition, a low number of reports can
also be the result of a drug that is withdrawn from the market. Out
of the 13 FNs, two are drugs that were never marketed in the US
(moxisylyte and lumiracoxib) and were withdrawn from markets
elsewhere due to hepatotoxicity concerns, and one was withdrawn
from the US market (iproniazid) and elsewhere due to hepatotoxicity prior to systematic tracking of adverse events by the FDA, which
began in the year 1969. Taken together, and despite the limitations
of voluntary reporting data, the classiﬁer derived using such data
yields high concordance with annotations based on drug labeling
and shows the utility of our FAERS-based classiﬁer for capturing
DILI information to reliably serve as a QSAR model training set.
4. Discussion
From a regulatory perspective, a drug-AE signal typically incites
further investigation before conclusion of a causal relationship is
drawn. This is a labor-intensive, yet important process that includes

70

X. Zhu, N.L. Kruhlak / Toxicology 321 (2014) 62–72

Fig. 10. Detection of positives within the top-ﬁve pharmacologic classes ranked by frequency of drugs classiﬁed as positive. (A) Comparison of the total number of drugs
(pattern), those classiﬁed as positives (light gray), and true positives (dark gray) for each pharmacologic class. (B) Representative structures from each class. BD: benzodiazepine
derivatives; DD: dihydropyridine derivatives; FLQ: ﬂuoroquinolones; NRTI: nucleotide/nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors; PKI: protein kinase inhibitors; PI: protease
inhibitors.

searching for supporting evidence such as that described by Hy’s
Law (Zimmerman, 1999), identifying secondary diseases/traits
commonly associated with liver damage, or verifying pre-existing
disease states or other confounding factors present in the patients
for whom the reports are submitted. This approach is thorough, but
impractical for application to a large database.
In this study we derived a methodology for using postmarketing data to generate a training set suitable for QSAR analyses
by developing a classiﬁcation algorithm for the assignment of
hepatotoxic potential to drug entities extracted from FDA’s AERS
database. To verify and optimize a classiﬁcation tree, we utilized a calibration set composed of known hepatotoxicants and
non-hepatotoxicants derived from an independent source. Furthermore, we explored the use of different signal identiﬁcation metrics
when applied to the FAERS data and systematically observed superior performance characteristics for EBGM scoring compared to
PRR in yielding a good balance between sensitivity and speciﬁcity over the calibration set. By supplementing the primary
DILI endpoint with supporting terms and positive PT counts, we
identiﬁed an optimal classiﬁcation scheme for DILI that further
increased the sensitivity of detection on the calibration set, which
was then applied to classify the hepatotoxicity of our entire data
set of 2029 modelable drug entities. Drugs classiﬁed using this
methodology showed high concordance with other sources of data,
such as drug labels and the published literature, conﬁrming the
value of our post-marketing data-based approach to DILI detection.

4.1. Potential challenges of using post-marketing data
In spontaneous reporting systems the submitting party makes a
best judgment of the deﬁnition of the AE and suspect drugs responsible for the AE based on available information. Because spontaneity
and human judgments are error-prone by nature, it is important to
account for possible impacts on the reliability of the data. Some
of the widely-known issues with post-marketing reports include
underreporting, biased reporting, and lack of data points essential for establishing causality. This also includes the issue of data
duplication due to different reporting sources for the same event
(Hauben et al., 2007). The ESignal system, the source of our data,
addresses some of these issues through manual data curation, pruning to remove duplicates, removal of confounding associations, and
stratiﬁcation based on age, gender, and year. However, there is currently no systematic method to address underreporting and biased
reporting. The method of MGPS is superior to more traditionally
used frequentist approaches such as PRR in signal detection because
of its tolerance for low report counts; however, like other statistical approaches, the accuracy of Bayesian methods is dependent on
adequate sampling. Because not all drugs are created equal, the
underreported drug-AE pairs and drug entities as a whole may not
be adequately treated by this statistical metric. A drug that has
been marketed for several years may have a misleadingly low EBGM
because the drug may either (1) have overall limited market penetration, (2) have not been adequately monitored, or (3) have had
early safety issues that led to restricted usage or withdrawal. For

X. Zhu, N.L. Kruhlak / Toxicology 321 (2014) 62–72
Table 4
Statistics on the training sets.

71

5. Conclusion

Endpoint

All

Training set positives

% Positive (ratioa )

LD
CHOL
LEA
BDD

2029
2029
2029
2029

1315
1207
1204
1102

50.27 (1.01)
26.22 (0.36)
36.11 (0.57)
12.81 (0.15)

LD: liver damage; CHOL: cholestasis; LEA: liver enzyme abnormalities; BDD: bileduct disorders
a
Ratio calculated as # positives/# negatives.

example, a treatment for hypercholesterolemia torcetrapib, which
has a total of nine reported suspect associations, was in fact halted
in 2009 in Phase III clinical trials due to excessive mortality when
used in combination with atorvastatin (Howes and Kostner, 2007;
Tall et al., 2007). Another case is that of alacepril, a veterinary drug
that was tested in Japan to treat hypertension in elderly hypertensive diabetics (Utsunomiya and Ikeda, 1991), which had only 46
suspect associations in our dataset. These limitations are intrinsic to the methodology and should be considered when using our
FAERS derived dataset for QSAR modeling.

4.2. QSAR modeling considerations
With increasing computational power and improved methodologies, successful application of QSAR methods in drug discovery
and development has become common. However, the accuracy of
QSAR models largely depends on the quality of the data, namely
the signal-to-noise ratio. Though some methods are more tolerant
of noise and outliers, in general, it is desirable to maximize reliability of training data. Because of the various limitations in using
AERS data, one strategy to lower the noise is through the reduction
of negatives, since these have the higher likelihood of being incorrect. Furthermore, it is desirable for QSAR modeling to have similar
frequencies of positive and negative examples in the training set to
minimize bias in the model and misinterpretation of performance
statistics, yet by nature marketed drugs are designed to confer therapeutic beneﬁt with an absence of hepatotoxic effects which yields
a data set biased toward negative examples. Filtering for this purpose can be achieved by using three metrics. From the previously
discussed limitations of AERS, we propose that a negative call can
be nulliﬁed and removed from the training set if (1) the drug has
received insufﬁcient clinical attention, (2) at least one structured
study implied a causal relationship between the drug and endpoint,
or (3) the drug has not been in the market long enough for the
manifestation of adverse events. To this end, we removed negative
examples from the training set if the drug (1) had a total number
of reports <50, (2) had evidence of an association by other methods
(Fourches et al., 2010; Suzuki et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2011), or (3)
ﬁrst appeared in the PDR within 5 years or less. The ﬁnal yield of the
number of positives and negatives are summarized in Table 4 and
the entire liver damage data set with ﬂags for ﬁltered compounds is
provided as Supplemental Data. These datasets will be useful in the
construction of QSAR models for early-stage evaluation of pharmaceutical entities against DILI-related endpoints. Having the largest
number of compounds and more generalized physiology, one likely
scenario is the use of the LD model as the primary endpoint supplemented by secondary endpoints LE, CHOL, and BD to form a battery
of predictors for DILI. Secondary endpoints can be used as second
opinion predictors to reinforce or boost LD model predictions. This
will be most useful in scenarios where LD-predicted probability
values are near but below the positive activity threshold. Modeling
efforts using these datasets are currently underway through the
Chemical Informatics Program at FDA/CDER.

In this work we constructed a classiﬁer using post-market
data in an attempt to algorithmically utilize drug-AE data without manual review of individual case reports. This algorithm uses
the disproportionate reporting metric EBGM calculated with the
MGPS method over liver injury-related endpoints and employs two
groups of supporting terms corresponding to serological biomarkers and related clinical manifestations. Brieﬂy, the optimized
algorithm combines a hard signal cutoff for each endpoint supplemented, in the case of LD, by supporting endpoints and active PT
counts. Though not without limitations, the ﬁnal data set can be
readily used alone for read-across analysis or as a training set to
derive DILI QSAR models. In addition, our developed methodology
can be readily transferred to other drug-related AE endpoints to
facilitating toxicological proﬁling of new molecular entities within
the FDA.
Supplementary data
Table S1 and accompanying sdf containing the structures
and activity data for the calibration set are available at
http://www.journals.elsevier.com/toxicology/. The entire liver
damage data set, including activity score, structure ID, chemical
name and ﬂag for ﬁltering negatives is also available as Supplemental Data in csv and sdf formats.
Funding
This study was supported by intramural funding from the
FDA Critical Path Initiative. Xiao Zhu is appointed by the ORISE
Research Participation Program at the Center for Drug Evaluation
and Research administered by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science
and Education.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that there are no conﬂicts of interest.
Transparency document
The Transparency document associated with this article can be
found in the online version.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr. Lidiya Stavitskaya for help with the review
of the manuscript and Ms. Barbara L. Minnier for providing the
chemical structure ﬁles.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in
the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2014.03.009.
References
Adikwu, E., Deo, O., 2013. Hepatoprotective effect of vitamin C (ascorbic acid).
Pharmacol. Pharm. 4 (1), 13.
Ahmed, I., Haramburu, F., et al., 2009. Bayesian pharmacovigilance signal detection methods revisited in a multiple comparison setting. Stat. Med. 28 (13),
1774–1792.
Al-Attar, A.M., 2011. Hepatoprotective inﬂuence of vitamin C on
thioacetamide-induced liver cirrhosis in Wistar male rats. J. Pharmacol.
Toxicol. 6, 16.
Almenoff, J.S., DuMouchel, W., et al., 2003. Disproportionality analysis using empirical Bayes data mining: a tool for the evaluation of drug interactions in the
post-marketing setting. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 12 (6), 517–521.

72

X. Zhu, N.L. Kruhlak / Toxicology 321 (2014) 62–72

Almenoff, J.S., LaCroix, K.K., et al., 2006. Comparative performance of two quantitative safety signalling methods: implications for use in a pharmacovigilance
department. Drug Saf. 29 (10), 875–887.
Aronson, J.K., Dukes, M.N.G., 2006. Meyler’s Side Effects of Drugs: The International
Encyclopedia of Adverse Drug Reactions and Interactions. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
Boston.
Awadalla, E.A., 2012. Efﬁcacy of vitamin C against liver and kidney damage induced
by paraquat toxicity. Exp. Toxicol. Pathol. 64 (5), 431–434.
Basile, C., Mascia, E., 1999. Dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers: a rare and
reversible cause of hepatotoxicity with cholestasis in a CAPD patient. Nephrol.
Dial. Transplant. 14 (11), 2776–2777.
Boelsterli, U.A., 2003. Mechanisms underlying the hepatotoxicity of nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs. In: Kaplowitz, N., DeLeve, L.D. (Eds.), Drug-induced
Liver Disease. Marcel Dekker, New York/Basel, pp. 345–375.
Bonacini, M., Louie, S., et al., 2003. Hepatic injury from antiviral agents. In: Kaplowitz,
N., DeLeve, L.D. (Eds.), Drug-induced Liver Disease. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp.
519–548.
Brown, E.G., Wood, L., et al., 1999. The medical dictionary for regulatory activities
(MedDRA). Drug Saf. 20 (2), 109–117.
Chen, M., Vijay, V., et al., 2011. FDA-approved drug labeling for the study of
drug-induced liver injury. Drug Discovery Today 16 (15-16), 697–703.
Chen, Y., Guo, J.J., et al., 2008. Risk of hepatotoxicity associated with the use of
telithromycin: a signal detection using data mining algorithms. Ann. Pharmacother. 42 (12), 1791–1796.
Cooper II, J.A., Saracci, R., et al., 1979. Describing the validity of carcinogen screening
tests. Br. J. Cancer 39 (1), 87–89.
Deshpande, G., Gogolak, V., et al., 2010. Data mining in drug safety: review of
published threshold criteria for deﬁning signals of disproportionate reporting.
Pharm. Med. 24 (1), 37–43.
DuMouchel, W., 1999. Bayesian data mining in large frequency tables, with an application to the FDA spontaneous reporting system. Am. Statistician 53 (3.).
Elashoff, M., Matveyenko, A.V., et al., 2011. Pancreatitis, pancreatic, and thyroid
cancer with glucagon-like peptide-1-based therapies. Gastroenterology 141 (1),
150–156.
Evans, S.J., Waller, P.C., et al., 2001. Use of proportional reporting ratios (PRRs) for
signal generation from spontaneous adverse drug reaction reports. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 10 (6), 483–486.
Fontana, R.J., Watkins, P.B., et al., 2009. Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network (DILIN)
prospective study: rationale, design and conduct. Drug Saf. 32 (1), 55–68.
Fourches, D., Barnes, J.C., et al., 2010. Cheminformatics analysis of assertions mined
from literature that describe drug-induced liver injury in different species.
Chem. Res. Toxicol. 23 (1), 171–183.
Gale, E.A., 2009. Collateral damage: the conundrum of drug safety. Diabetologia 52
(10), 1975–1982.
Ghabril, M., Chalasani, N., et al., 2010. Drug-induced liver injury: a clinical update.
Curr. Opin. Gastroenterol. 26 (3), 222–226.
Goldman, S.A., 1998. Limitations and strengths of spontaneous reports data. Clin.
Ther. 20 (Suppl. C), C40–C44.
Gupta, N.K., Lewis, J.H., 2008. Review article: The use of potentially hepatotoxic drugs
in patients with liver disease. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 28 (9), 1021–1041.
Hauben, M., 2004. Early postmarketing drug safety surveillance: data mining points
to consider. Ann. Pharmacother. 38 (10), 1625–1630.
Hauben, M., Reich, L., et al., 2007. ‘Extreme duplication’ in the US FDA Adverse Events
Reporting System database. Drug Saf. 30 (6), 551–554.
Ho, C.C., Chen, Y.C., et al., 2009. Safety of ﬂuoroquinolone use in patients with
hepatotoxicity induced by anti-tuberculosis regimens. Clin. Infect. Dis. 48 (11),
1526–1533.
Hoofnagle, J.H., Serrano, J., et al., 2013. LiverTox: a website on drug-induced liver
injury. Hepatology 57 (3), 873–874.
Howes, L.G., Kostner, K., 2007. The withdrawal of torcetrapib from drug development: implications for the future of drugs that alter HDL metabolism. Expert
Opin. Investig. Drugs 16 (10), 1509–1516.

Jaeschke, H., 2007. Troglitazone hepatotoxicity: are we getting closer to understanding idiosyncratic liver injury? Toxicol. Sci. 97 (1), 1–3.
Jones, M., Nunez, M., 2012. Liver toxicity of antiretroviral drugs. Semin. Liver Dis. 32
(2), 167–176.
Kaplowitz, N., 2005. Idiosyncratic drug hepatotoxicity. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 4 (6),
489–499.
Lewis, W., Day, B.J., et al., 2003. Mitochondrial toxicity of NRTI antiviral drugs: an
integrated cellular perspective. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2 (10), 812–822.
Lopez-Gonzalez, E., Herdeiro, M.T., et al., 2009. Determinants of under-reporting of
adverse drug reactions: a systematic review. Drug Saf. 32 (1), 19–31.
Mantel, N., Haenszel, W., 1959. Statistical aspects of the analysis of data from retrospective studies of disease. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 22 (4), 719–748.
Matthews, E.J., Ursem, C.J., et al., 2009. Identiﬁcation of structure–activity relationships for adverse effects of pharmaceuticals in humans: Part B. Use of (Q)SAR
systems for early detection of drug-induced hepatobiliary and urinary tract
toxicities. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 54 (1), 23–42.
Mendrick, D.L., Daniels, K.K., 2007. Biomarkers of drug-induced adverse events.
Expert Rev. Clin. Pharmacol. 1 (1), 81–91.
Moride, Y., Haramburu, F., et al., 1997. Under-reporting of adverse drug reactions in
general practice. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 43 (2), 177–181.
Mosby, 2007. Mosby’s Drug Consult. St. Mosby, Louis, MO.
Orman, E.S., Conjeevaram, H.S., et al., 2011. Clinical and histopathologic features
of ﬂuoroquinolone-induced liver injury. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 9 (6),
517–523, e513.
Ozkan, F., Gunduz, S.G., et al., 2012. The protective role of ascorbic acid (vitamin
C) against chlorpyrifos-induced oxidative stress in Oreochromis niloticus. Fish
Physiol. Biochem. 38 (3), 635–643.
Paterson, J.M., Mamdani, M.M., et al., 2012. Fluoroquinolone therapy and idiosyncratic acute liver injury: a population-based study. CMAJ 184 (14), 1565–1570.
Rouse, R., Siwy, J., et al., 2012. Proteomic candidate biomarkers of drug-induced
nephrotoxicity in the rat. PLoS One 7 (4), e34606.
Smythe, M.A., Umstead, G.S., 1989. Phenytoin hepatotoxicity: a review of the literature. DICP 23 (1), 13–18.
Suzuki, A., Andrade, R.J., et al., 2010. Drugs associated with hepatotoxicity and their
reporting frequency of liver adverse events in VigiBase: uniﬁed list based on
international collaborative work. Drug Saf. 33 (6), 503–522.
Szarfman, A., Machado, S.G., et al., 2002. Use of screening algorithms and computer
systems to efﬁciently signal higher-than-expected combinations of drugs and
events in the US FDA’s spontaneous reports database. Drug Saf. 25 (6), 381–392.
Szarfman, A., Tonning, J.M., et al., 2004. Pharmacovigilance in the 21st century: new
systematic tools for an old problem. Pharmacotherapy 24 (9), 1099–1104.
Tall, A.R., Yvan-Charvet, L., et al., 2007. The failure of torcetrapib: was it the molecule
or the mechanism? Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 27 (2), 257–260.
Teo, Y.L., Ho, H.K., et al., 2013. Risk of tyrosine kinase inhibitors-induced hepatotoxicity in cancer patients: a meta-analysis. Cancer Treat. Rev. 39 (2), 199–206.
Tolosa, E., Marti, M.J., et al., 1998. History of levodopa and dopamine agonists in
Parkinson’s disease treatment. Neurology 50 (6 (Suppl. 6)), S2–S10, discussion
S44–18.
Tujios, S., Fontana, R.J., 2011. Mechanisms of drug-induced liver injury: from bedside
to bench. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 8 (4), 202–211.
Ursem, C.J., Kruhlak, N.L., et al., 2009. Identiﬁcation of structure–activity relationships for adverse effects of pharmaceuticals in humans. Part A: Use of FDA
post-market reports to create a database of hepatobiliary and urinary tract
toxicities. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 54 (1), 1–22.
Utsunomiya, K., Ikeda, Y., 1991. Beneﬁcial effect of alacepril, a new
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor on albuminuria and glycemic
state: an open multicenter trial. Alacepril Study Group. J. Diabet. Complications
5 (2–3), 165–166.
Yang, X., Freeman, J., et al., 2008. Data mining in pharmacovigilance practice: which
algorithm to use? Drug Saf. 31 (10), 885.
Zimmerman, H.J., 1999. Drug-induced liver disease. In: Hepatotoxicity: The Adverse
Effects of Drugs and Other Chemicals on the Liver.

