Expert Opinion on Drug Safety

ISSN: 1474-0338 (Print) 1744-764X (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ieds20

Quantitative data mining in signal detection: the
Singapore experience
Cheng Leng Chan, Sally Soh, Siew Har Tan, Pei San Ang, Sowmya Rudrappa,
Shu Chuen Li & Stephen J.W. Evans
To cite this article: Cheng Leng Chan, Sally Soh, Siew Har Tan, Pei San Ang, Sowmya
Rudrappa, Shu Chuen Li & Stephen J.W. Evans (2020) Quantitative data mining in signal
detection: the Singapore experience, Expert Opinion on Drug Safety, 19:5, 633-639, DOI:
10.1080/14740338.2020.1734559
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/14740338.2020.1734559

View supplementary material

Published online: 02 Mar 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 92

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ieds20

EXPERT OPINION ON DRUG SAFETY
2020, VOL. 19, NO. 5, 633–639
https://doi.org/10.1080/14740338.2020.1734559

ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Quantitative data mining in signal detection: the Singapore experience
Cheng Leng Chana,b, Sally Soha, Siew Har Tana, Pei San Anga, Sowmya Rudrappaa,c, Shu Chuen Lib and
Stephen J.W. Evansd
a

Health Products Regulation Group, Health Sciences Authority, Singapore, Singapore; bSchool of Biomedical Sciences & Pharmacy, The University of
Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia; cGenome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore, Singapore;
d
Department of Medical Statistics, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, University of London, London, United Kingdom
ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

Background: In Singapore, the Health Sciences Authority (HSA) reviews an average of 20,000 spontaneous adverse event (AE) reports yearly. Potential safety signals are identified manually and discussed
on a weekly basis. In this study, we compared the use of four quantitative data mining (QDM) methods
with weekly manual review to determine if signals of disproportionate reporting (SDRs) can improve the
efficiency of manual reviews and thereby enhance drug safety signal detection.
Methods: We formulated a QDM triage strategy to reduce the number of SDRs for weekly review and
compared the results against those derived from manual reviews alone for the same 6-month period.
We then incorporated QDM triage into the manual review workflow for the subsequent two 6-month
periods and made further comparisons against QDM triage alone.
Results: The incorporation of QDM triage into routine manual reviews resulted in a reduction of 20% to
30% in the number of drug–AE pairs identified for further evaluation. Sequential Probability Ratio Test
(SPRT) detected more signals that mirror human manual signal detection than the other three methods.
Conclusions: The adoption of QDM triage into our manual reviews is a more efficient way forward in
signal detection, avoiding missing important drug safety signals.

Received 17 May 2019
Accepted 21 February 2020

1. Introduction
Statistical quantitative data mining (QDM) tools have been
used by various drug regulatory agencies for routine drug
safety signal detection. However, the use of QDM tools is
noted to have limitations, [1] and hence not solely relied
upon by most agencies for signal detection. Instead, regulatory agencies that adopt QDM tools often supplement their
detection methods with the traditional method of manual
review in order to establish best practices. In this regard,
QDM is often employed as a first-pass screening for detecting
drug safety signals in large collections of individual case safety
reports [2]. For agencies with smaller databases, and lower
numbers of new reports arriving each week, it is possible,
though becoming more difficult with the increasing volume
of new reports, to combine manual screening with QDM as
the primary stage, rather than a two-stage process.
In Singapore, the Health Sciences Authority (HSA) receives
spontaneous adverse event (AE) reports relating to drugs,
vaccines, and other health products from healthcare professionals and pharmaceutical companies in Singapore since
1993 [3]. The number of reports received annually has been
rising and is now an average of 20,000 [3]. At HSA, spontaneous AE reports are currently manually reviewed by regulatory specialists with a minimum qualification of a Bachelor’s
degree in Pharmacy. Potential safety signals are then

CONTACT Cheng Leng Chan
chan_cheng_leng@hsa.gov.sg
Singapore 138667, Singapore
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed here.
© 2020 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

KEYWORDS

Spontaneous reports; signal
detection; quantitative data
mining (QDM); QDM triage;
sequential probability ratio
test; SPRT; signals of
disproportionate reporting

identified and discussed at weekly meetings, where
a decision is made if further signal evaluation and validation
is necessary. As the volume of data has risen, it has become
necessary to find more efficient approaches to supplement
traditional manual review of the AE reports in order to facilitate timely response and actions to potential safety signals.
It is known that other overseas regulatory agencies with
larger spontaneous AE report databases have employed QDM
as a first-pass screening for potential drug safety signals. Given
that the number of reports in Singapore, whilst high on a per million inhabitant basis [4], is still relatively small in absolute numbers, we developed a methodology of employing
QDM together with manual review as a first-pass screening
for such purposes.
In 2015, HSA explored the use of disproportionality analysis methods including reporting odds ratio (ROR), Bayesian
Confidence Propagation Neural Network (BCPNN) and
Gamma Poisson Shrinker (GPS) to pick up signals of disproportionate reporting (SDRs) for potential drug safety signals
in the Singapore context [3]. These methods are based on the
ratio of observed-to-expected counts of reports to obtain
signals, and many studies have shown that no single signal
detection algorithm provides uniformly better performance
[5,6]. However, these methods do not allow for multiple looks
at the accumulating data over time, which can result in large

Health Products Regulation Group, Health Sciences Authority, 11 Biopolis Way #11-01 Helios

634

C. L. CHAN ET AL.

numbers of false-positive findings. Subsequently, we
explored the Sequential Probability Ratio Test (SPRT) method,
which overcomes some multiple testing problems and looked
at its performance using two hypothesized relative risks.
A comparison of SPRT with other methods was also made
[7]. Overall, these methods detected large numbers of signals,
some of which were true signals requiring further evaluation,
while some turned out to be within the expected frequency
requiring no further action. We identified SPRT to have some
useful applications in the Singapore database in our earlier
study. In July 2016, HSA officially incorporated the use of
QDM tools into routine signal identification on a weekly
basis. The thresholds of each method were defined in our
earlier publications [7]. In order to evaluate thousands of
SDRs generated for review every week, we also formulated
a triage strategy to reduce the number of SDRs to be
reviewed.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the performance of the QDM triage in enhancing our signal detection
process. We determined if combining manual review and QDM
triage in routine work is an efficient way forward in identifying
drug safety signals from HSA’s spontaneous AE reports
database.

2. Method
Spontaneous AE reports were first verified to ensure the
reports met the minimum criteria for reporting based on ICH
E2D requirements [8]. An adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence in a patient administered a medicinal product
and which does not necessarily have to have a causal relationship with this treatment [8]. Drugs and AE terms were coded
using World Health Organization Anatomical Therapeutic
Chemical (WHO ATC) [9] codes and Medical Dictionary for
Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) [10] terms, respectively.
Clinical assessments of individual reports often necessitated
follow-ups with reporters, particularly for serious reports and/
or drugs of interest to address any missing information
required for causality assessments. Causality assessments
were conducted using World Health Organization-Uppsala
Monitoring Center (WHO-UMC) causality assessment [11]
criteria.
Signal detection analyses were then conducted for spontaneous AE reports received from January 2016 to June 2017.
We divided our analyses into three 6-month periods. Both
quantitative and qualitative comparisons were made.
For the quantitative analysis, the number of potential signals identified by manual review weekly was compared with
the number of SDRs detected through QDM triage for the first
six months of 2016, when manual review and QDM methods
were used independently. This was followed by the comparison of the potential signals generated by the combination of
both manual review and QDM triage versus the SDRs from
QDM alone for the subsequent two 6–month periods,
i.e. second half of 2016 to the first six months of 2017. This
was the pragmatic comparison of relevance to our system.
For the qualitative analysis, we compared the timeliness of
signal detection conducted manually versus SDRs generated

by QDM triage against the safety alerts communication issued
by overseas regulatory agencies.

2.1. Manual signal detection
From January to June 2016, weekly manual signal detection of
the spontaneous AE reports was conducted by eight regulatory
specialists on a rotational basis. Potential safety signals were
identified based on a checklist. We first identified reports with
serious AE terms listed in the checklist and reports containing
a combination of AE terms (MedDRA Preferred Terms (PTs))
suggestive of these serious events. For example, itching, hypotension, and apnea may suggest anaphylaxis. We also picked up
reports with drug–AE pairs of current interest. Other confounding factors such as indication, patient’s underlying medical conditions and age were taken into consideration in the review of
the reports. In formulating the serious AE terms in the checklist,
we considered if the AE exists in the WHO critical terms list [12] or
is considered to be a medically significant serious AE by US FDA
[13] or listed in the Important Medical Event Terms (IME) list [14].
We then looked at the numbers of reports received yearly for the
past 5 years. Although there had been a gradual increase in the
total number of AE reports annually in Singapore, the criterion
for comparing yearly increase remained largely unaffected for
specific drug–AE pairs. We also considered the expectedness of
drug–AE associations and frequency of the listed AEs based on
the latest version of the Singapore package insert (PI) [15] or
other regulatory agencies approved drug labels (e.g. United
States Food and Drug Administration (US FDA) Approved Drug
Products [16]), online medical reference (i.e. Micromedex®) [17]
and published literature. For example, a cluster of reports
received within a short time period for a listed AE with very
rare frequency would be considered a red flag for further evaluation. Any serious and unexpected AE would also be flagged for
discussion. Further analyses were done to aggregate reports with
similar AEs across a drug class or reports with related PT terms.
For example, reports of hepatitis, transaminase abnormality, and
jaundice were pooled to identify potential liver issues with
a drug. Potential safety signals were identified and raised for
team discussion at weekly meetings to see if these potential
signals warrant further signal evaluation.

2.2. Quantitative data mining for signal detection
Our algorithm for running the QDM tools was developed inhouse using R software, version 3.4.1 [18] and a signal detection package – PhVID [19]. The algorithm was applied to the
cumulative data in HSA AE database from 1993 and up to
June 2016. Four data mining methods, i.e. ROR, BCPNN, GPS,
and SPRT based on earlier defined thresholds (Table 1), were
used [7]. We ran QDM every week based on MedDRA PTs
which generated a few thousand SDRs accordingly.

2.2.1. QDM Triage
In order to analyze the large amount of data, a triage strategy
was adopted. Our algorithm first identified new drug–AE pairs,
new significant drug–AE pairs that changed from not significant to significant, or have more than or equal to a 25% rise in
frequency compared to the previous week which exceeded

EXPERT OPINION ON DRUG SAFETY

Table 1. Formulas and thresholds of methods used.
Methods
ROR
BCPNN
GPS
SPRT

Formula
ROR = (a × d)/(b × c)
IC = log2(O + 0.5/E + 0.5)
EBGM = e(EBln)
LLR = O x loge(hRR) – E x (hRR – 1)

Threshold
ROR – 1.96 SE > 1, N ≥ 3
IC – 1.96 SD > 0
EB05a > 1, N ≥ 3
2.77b

ROR, reporting odds ratio; BCPNN, Bayesian Confidence Propagation Neural
Networks; GPS, Gamma Poisson Shrinkage; SPRT, Sequential Probability
Ratio Test; a, number (no.) of reports listing the drug and the AE; b, no. of
reports listing the drug but not the AE; c, no. of reports listing the AE but not
the drug; d, no. of reports not listing the AE and the drug.
a
EB05 denotes the fifth percentile of confidence limits of empirical Bayes
geometric mean (EBGM).
b
α = 0.05 and β = 0.20.
hRR (hypothesized relative risks) – two values of hRR, i.e. 2 and 4.1 were used [3]

the threshold set by any of the four methods (supplementary
material). The results were then filtered for drug–AE pairs for
which a report was received for the most recent week and
further filtered by seriousness of the report (Figure 1).

2.3. Enhanced signal detection: manual signal detection
and quantitative data mining tools for weekly signal
detection
From July 2016 till June 2017, weekly signal detection encompassed both manual signal detection and QDM triage results for
the cumulative data in the HSA AE database from 1993 and up to
June 2017 (Figure 1). The regulatory specialists manually identified
potential safety signals based on seriousness and drug–AE pairs of
current interest, taking into consideration the confounding factors
for each report. Many drug–AE pairs identified by manual review
not flagged as SDRs were dropped from further assessment while
certain drug–AE pairs not flagged as SDRs were picked as they
were deemed to warrant further review. The numbers of reports
received for the flagged drug–AE pairs for the current year were
compared to the previous 5 years to determine whether there was
clustering of reports. The expectedness of drug–AE associations,
reports for related PT terms and drugs of the same class were also
considered.

Receive AE reports

Clinical evaluation
1. Check validity of report
2. Code drugs and AE terms
3. Follow-up with the reporters where needed
4. Perform causality assessment

Weekly manual signal detection
1. Serious AE of interest
2. Drug-AE pairs of current interest
3. Confounding factors such as
indication, patient’s underlying
medical conditions and age

QDM signal generation
Perform statistical analysis
using QDM tools

QDM triage strategy to identify drug-AE
pairs of interest received in the week
Either of the following criteria:
1. Existing drug-AE pairs where frequency
is 25% or higher than previous week
2. Signals change from “No” to “Yes”
3. New drug-AE pairs
And
• Serious AE terms
• Limit to drug-AE pairs for which a report
was received in the most recent week

1.
2.
3.
4.

Figure 1. Enhanced signal detection.

635

Identify drug-AE pairs for further evaluation
Compare the numbers of reports received yearly for the past 5 years
Check expectedness and frequency of the AE listed in the PI
Analyses on related PT terms for a specific drug of interest and cases
in the same drug class
Identify potential safety signals for discussion at weekly meetings

636

C. L. CHAN ET AL.

2.4. Qualitative review
For the qualitative analysis, we compared the timeliness of
weekly manual signal detection from January 2016 to
June 2017 versus SDRs generated by QDM triage against the
safety alerts communication issued by overseas regulatory
agencies (US FDA), European Medicines Agency (EMA) and
Health Canada) from 2014 to 2017 and the WHO-UMC
Newsletter SIGNAL. These overseas alerts were regarded as
‘true’ signals to see if our signal detection methods had picked
up the same drug–AE associations. A longer period of overseas
alerts was chosen instead of limiting to the period of 2016 to
end June 2017 to allow comparison to be made with more
drug–AE pairs.

3. Results
3.1. Signal detection with weekly QDM – a quantitative
analysis
A total of 218,719 spontaneous AE reports were received by
HSA from 1993 to June 2017. From January 2016 to June 2017,
we received 31,455 AE reports or slightly more than 10,000
reports over each half-year period. Cumulatively, there were
28,525 unique drug–AE pairs in the database as of June 2017
as there may be more than one drug–AE pair for each report
received (Table 2). QDM alone without triage for each data
mining algorithm generated more than 2,600 SDRs every
week.
The use of QDM triage resulted in a significant drop in the
number of SDRs for review (Table 3). More than 200 SDRs were
picked up by QDM triage during each half-year period. From
January to June 2016, 258 drug–AE pairs were identified as
potential signals from manual detection and 222 SDRs were
identified by QDM triage. 88 pairs were common pairs identified by both methods. From July 2016 to June of 2017, the
incorporation of weekly QDM triage into the workflow
reduced the number of drug–AE pairs identified as potential
signals to 180 and 206, i.e. a 20% to 30% reduction compared
to January to June of 2016. Some drug–AE pairs not flagged as
SDRs by QDM triage were dropped. Conversely, some SDRs
missed by manual review were included in the final evaluation
of potential safety signals. Overall, the number of common
pairs remained consistent, i.e. 80 and 93 for July to
December 2016 and January to June 2017, respectively
(Table 3).
A Venn diagram shows the overlap of significant pairs
detected through manual signal detection and QDM triage
(Figure 2). There is a reduction in the number of drug–AE
pairs identified when QDM triage was employed. This illustrates that the incorporation of QDM triage has resulted in

Table 3. Breakdown of the number (no.) of reports received, no. of signals of
disproportionate reporting (SDRs) with QDM triage and no. of potential safety
signals.
No. of
No. of SDRs
reports
picked up by
received for
QDM
the period
Triage(a)

Period
Jan – Jun 2016
Jul – Dec 2016
Jan – Jun 2017

10,024
10,830
10,601

No. of
potential
safety signals
identified (b)

Common
pairs
between
(a) and (b)

258
180*
206*

88
80
93

222
213
234

*Incorporation of QDM into weekly signal detection, leading to less no. of
potential drug–AE pairs being identified for further review.

a more streamlined workflow for signal detection. The overall
time spent for the enhanced signal detection process was
reduced from 8 to 10 hours to 4–6 hours every week.
For the drug–AE pairs identified as potential safety signals
by the regulatory specialist and not flagged as SDRs, these
could be drug–AE pairs of current interest, related PT terms
that were necessary to be pooled for separate analyses, clustering of reports within a short time frame, AEs not listed in
the PIs or other similar cases seen in drugs of the same drug
class.
The performance of different QDM methods was further
evaluated. Out of the four methods, although ROR produced
more SDRs, SPRT mirrored human manual signal detection the
most, in consistently identifying more common pairs over the
different time periods (Figure 2).

3.2. Signal detection with QDM – a qualitative analysis
of the timeliness of signal detection
Table 4 highlights the safety signals communicated by overseas regulatory agencies from 2014 to 2017 that were picked
up by manual signal detection versus SDRs generated by QDM
triage from our AE database. Based on the thresholds set, the
SPRT method could detect drug–AE pairs of potential safety
concerns if there are at least two reports in the database. GPS
and ROR require at least three reports, whereas a minimal no.
of report is not required for BCPNN to identify signals. Two
drug–AE pairs, quetiapine-renal impairment and trastuzumab–cardiomyopathy picked up by manual signal detection
were missed by QDM. Only two reports received were
received for each of these drug–AE pairs. Conversely, QDM
triage picked up some SDRs that were missed by manual
signal detection. These were arthralgia with ciprofloxacin,
endophthalmitis with ranibizumab and urinary tract infections
with dapagliflozin and empagliflozin. These AEs were perceived as non-serious in nature and/or expected reactions to
be caused by the drugs and hence not picked up by manual
review.

Table 2. Breakdown of the number (no.) of signals of disproportionate reporting (SDRs) generated by QDM.
ROR

BCPNN

GPS

SPRT

Week of review
Last week of Jun 2016

Cumulative no. of unique drug–AE pairs
26,672(1993 – Jun 2016)

Total no. of SDRs
3307

Total no. of SDRs
2679

Total no. of SDRs
2766

Total no. of SDRs
2935

Last week of Dec 2016
Last week of Jun 2017

27,597(1993 – Dec 2016)
28,525(1993 – Jun 2017)

3438
3567

2805
2882

2880
2987

3046
3164

EXPERT OPINION ON DRUG SAFETY

637

Figure 2. Venn diagrams illustrating the numbers of significant drug–AE pairs generated by the various methods from January 2016 to June 2017.
*Enhanced signal detection is a combination of QDM triage and manual review.

Among the four methods, SPRT picked up the most common pairs with the manual reviews, followed by GPS.

4. Discussion
The incorporation of QDM triage into the workflow starting
from week 27 of 2016 to week 26 of 2017 showed a 20% to
30% reduction in the number of additional drug–AE pairs
needed to be reviewed manually. This showed that the use
of QDM triage had resulted in a more efficient signal detection
process based on a more objective data-driven decision.
Among the four QDM methods, SPRT detected more signals that mirror human manual signal detection. It also identified more drug–AE pairs that were detected by overseas
regulatory authorities. In our previous study [7], we found
SPRT tended to generate a higher percentage of new significant pairs compared to other methods. Our findings provide
additional support that SPRT may be a suitable method for our
small database for signal detection due to a smaller number of
reports for each drug–AE pair of interest. One may argue that
the small number of reports does not strictly constitute
a signal. During our signal detection, we overcome this by
manually conglomerating related MedDRA PTs for each drug
or each drug class for evaluation in totality to ensure emerging safety signals are not missed. Furthermore, in order to
optimizing public safety, the use of a more sensitive tool
would be congruent with the principle of being conservative.

The combination of both QDM triage and manual signal
detection as a first-pass screening appears to serve HSA well in
conducting its pharmacovigilance function. In many instances,
QDM triage picked up drug–AE pairs earlier as well as those
missed by manual signal detection. On the other hand, manual signal detection had picked up some drug–AE pairs which
were missed by QDM triage. For example, we detected
a potential safety signal of respiratory failure and severe hypotension with vancomycin that was not picked up by QDM
triage. Unlike many regulatory agencies which rely on disproportionality analysis for initial screening of large collections of
individual AE reports for signal detection, HSA is able to perform manual signal detection as the number of reports
received every week is relatively small, at an average of 400
reports. We are able to conglomerate MedDRA PTs both at
each report level and across reports for a more comprehensive
review and thus avoiding missing signals due to a small number of reports received for each MedDRA PT. This is not
possible with QDM methods as individual MedDRA PTs are
used to detect disproportionalities only. Moreover, unlike disproportionality methods that are usually calculated on the
cumulative data, manual signal detection allows a direct
insight into temporal changes in the frequency of reports.
However, manual signal detection is time consuming and
could be prone to bias, such as through past experience of
reviewers. More work needs to be done to look into the
design of appropriate groupings of PTs for QDM through
knowledge engineering techniques to increase the sensitivity

638

C. L. CHAN ET AL.

Table 4. Manual signal detection versus SDRs generated by QDM triage.
Drug–AE pairs highlighted by overseas regulatory agencies
Manual ROR BCPNN GPS SPRT Total no. of reports received Expected count
Crizotinib – bradycardia
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
3
0.094
Pembrolizumab – Stevens-Johnson Syndrome
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
3
0.108
Testosterone – pulmonary embolism
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
4
0.003
Canagliflozin – ketoacidosis
✓
✓
✓
✓
5
0.001
Piperacillin –Drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS)
✓
✓
✓
3
0.450
Dabigatran – gastrointestional hemorrhage
✓
✓
✓
6
0.031
Pembrolizumab – nephritis
✓
✓
✓
2
<0.0005
Dapagliflozin – ketoacidosis
✓
✓
2
<0.0005
Empagliflozin – ketoacidosis
✓
✓
2
0.001
Denosumab –osteonecrosis
✓
✓
3
0.003
Quetiapine –renal impairment
✓
2
0.152
Trastuzumab – cardiomyopathy
✓
2
0.021
Ciprofloxacin – arthralgia
✓
7
2.672
Empagliflozin – Urinary tract infection
✓
2
0.004
Dapagliflozin –Urinary tract infection
✓
3
0.004
Ranibizumab – endophthalmitis
✓
2
<0.0005

of automated signal detection [2]. This can potentially be used
as an initial screening for potential drug safety signals in
replacement of manual signal detection, resulting in a more
efficient and objective data-driven signal detection practice.
We recognized that the manual process of checking
expectedness and frequency of AEs is time consuming and
can benefit from automation using a structured database such
as PROTECT Database of adverse drug reactions [20]. However,
HSA has yet to adopt such databases due to the need for the
information to be up-to-date and relevant to our local setting.
Instead, to streamline the signal identification process, our
QDM triage strategy has allowed us to manage the number
of potential safety signals to be reviewed from the thousands
to a more manageable number per week. As the QDM triage
only focuses on the reports received for the week of review,
there is a possibility of missing SDRs not derived from the
reports from that week that had changed from non-significant
to significant signal. However, our manual review should help
to reduce the possibility of missing potential safety signals as
past reports were reviewed. For example, if an SDR for a drugliver term was identified for that week, we would review older
reports with related liver terms such as jaundice, hepatitis, and
transaminitis.
More than 100 drug–AE pairs per half-year period were
identified by manual signal detection to be potential safety
signals but had not been flagged as SDRs by QDM triage.
However, further analysis showed that more than 50% of these
drug–AE pairs had previously been identified as SDRs by QDM.
This means that if we had adopted QDM triage earlier, these
drug–AE pairs would be flagged earlier as SDRs. Therefore,
a longer period of review is needed to observe the closing in
the gap between manual signal detection and QDM triage.
We recognized that one potential limitation of our study is
the variability among the reviewers in the manual review of
drug–AE pairs. This was minimized by pooling the results over
a 6-month period to balance out the inherent differences
amongst the eight reviewers.
Further work remains to be done to optimize the performance of QDM triage such as employing one or two QDM
methods instead of all four to improve the signal-to-noise
ratio. In our study, four different methods of QDM were analyzed for comparing the performance of methods which best

mirror human manual signal detection. The US FDA uses
Multi–Item Gamma Poisson Shrinker (MGPS) [21] for its routine
surveillance activities, while WHO-UMC uses BCPNN [22].
Eudravigilance, on the other hand, uses ROR [23]. All of these
organizations were mining very large databases with millions
of reports received every year. We identify SPRT and possibly
GPS as the QDM methods better suited for Singapore with
a database size of about 200,000 spontaneous AE reports.
Further analyses would be needed to confirm these findings.

5. Conclusions
QDM has a role in detecting drug safety signals from spontaneous AE reports in the Singapore context. SPRT and possibly
GPS are suitable for small databases. Combining both manual
signal detection and QDM will avoid missing potentially
important drug safety signals.

Author contributions
CCL conceived and designed the study, was involved in the collection,
analysis, and interpretation of the data and drafted the manuscript. SS,
SHT, and SR were involved in the creation of codes for QDM triage, data
analysis and provided inputs in the drafting of the manuscript. PSA, SCL,
and SE were involved in the data analysis and provided inputs in drafting
the manuscript. All authors approved the paper as submitted and agreed
to be accountable for all aspects of the work.

Funding
This study was conducted under the SAPhIRE (Surveillance and
Pharmacogenomics Initiative for Adverse Drug Reactions) Project, funded
by the Biomedical Research Council of the Agency for Science,
Technology, and Research of Singapore [Grant Award Number SPF2014/
001]

Declaration of interest
The authors have no relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any
organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with
the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes
employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert
testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or royalties.

EXPERT OPINION ON DRUG SAFETY

Reviewer disclosures
Peer reviewers on this manuscript have no relevant financial or other
relationships to disclose.

References
Papers of special note have been highlighted as either of interest (•) or of
considerable interest (••) to readers.
1. Stephenson WP, Hauben M. Data mining for signals in spontaneous
reporting databases: proceed with caution. Pharmacoepidemiol
Drug Saf. 2007 Apr;16(4):359–365.
2. Wisniewski AFZ, Bate A, Bousquet C, et al. Good signal detection
practices: evidence from IMI PROTECT. Drug Saf. 2016;39(6):469–490.
•• This paper provides evidence-based approaches for signal
detection practices
3. Ang PS, Chen Z, Chan CL, et al. Data mining spontaneous adverse
drug event reports for safety signals in Singapore – a comparison
of three different disproportionality measures. Expert Opin Drug
Saf. 2016;15(5):583–590.
• This paper provides information on the comparison of different data mining methods and how the statistical thresholds
may be defined
4. Koh YLA, Tan L, Ang PS, et al. Pharmacovigilance in Singapore—
harnessing IT and genomics to detect safety signals. Regul Aff
J-Pharma. 2012;(Oct issue):13–15. [Cited 2019 Mar 1] Available
from: https://pink.pharmaintelligence.informa.com/PS116976/
Pharmacovigilance-in-Singapore–harnessing-IT-and-genomics-todetect-safety-signals
5. Candore G, Juhlin K, Manlik K, et al. Comparison of statistical signal
detection methods within and across spontaneous reporting
databases. Drug Saf. 2015;38(6):577–587.
6. Poluzzi E, Raschi E, Piccinni C, et al.. Data mining techniques in
pharmacovigilance: analysis of the publicly accessible FDA adverse
event reporting system (AERS). Available from: https://www.inte
chopen.com/books/data-mining-applications-in-engineering-andmedicine/data-mining-techniques-in-pharmacovigilance-analysisof-the-publicly-accessible-fda-adverse-event-re
7. Chan CL, Rudrappa S, Ang PS, et al. Detecting signals of disproportionate reporting from singapore’s spontaneous adverse event
reporting system: an application of the sequential probability
ratio test. Drug Saf. 2017;40(8):703–713.
• This paper provides explanation of sequential probability ratio
test and how the hypothesised relative risks could be varied
for the different types of adverse events
8. International conference on harmonisation of technical requirements for
registration of pharmaceuticals for human use. ICH Harmonised tripartite
guideline. Post-approval safety data management: definitions and standards for expedited reporting; [Cited 2019 Mar 1]; Available from: https://
database.ich.org/sites/default/files/E2D_Guideline.pdf
9. World Health Organisation. The anatomical therapeutic chemical
classification system; [Cited 2019 Mar 1]. Available from: https://
www.who.int/classifications/atcddd/en/Accessed

639

10. The Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA). [Cited
2019 Mar 1]; Available from: https://www.meddra.org/basics
11. The use of the WHO-UMC system for standardised case causality
assessment; [Cited 2019 Mar 1]; Available from: https://www.who.
int/medicines/areas/quality_safety/safety_efficacy/WHOcausality_
assessment.pdf
12. Stahl M, Lindquist M, Edwards IR, et al. Introducing triage logic as
a new strategy for the detection of signals in the WHO drug
monitoring database. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2004;13
(6):355–363.
13. US Food and Drug Administration. Department of health and
human services. Safety reporting requirements for human drug
and biological products; federal register; 2003 March 14 [Cited
2019 Dec 26]; Available from: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/
pkg/FR-2003-03-14/pdf/03-5204.pdf
14. EudraVigilance Expert Working Group. Important medical event
terms list (based on MedDRA version 18.1); [Cited 2015 Sept 19];
Available from: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/other/
eudravigilance-inclusion/exclusion-criteria-important-medicalevents-list_en.pdf’
15. Health Sciences Authority, Singapore. Infosearch to retrieve drug
package inserts; [Cited 2018 Jan 4]; Available from: https://eservice.
hsa.gov.sg/prism/common/enquirepublic/SearchDRBProduct.do?
action=load
16. US Food and Drug Administration. Drugs@FDA: FDA approved
drug products; [Cited 2018 Jan 4]; Available from: https://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/index.cfm
17. IBM Watson. Micromedex® 2.0 (electronic version); Greenwood
Village, Colorado, USA. Available from: http://www.micromedexso
lutions.com/
18. R Development Core Team. 2014. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R foundation for statistical
computing; [Cited 2018 Jan 4]; Available from: http://www.
R-project.org
19. Ahmed I, Poncet A. 2012. PhViD: a R package for pharmacovigilance signal detection. R package version 1.0.4. Available from:
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/PhViD/
20. PROTECT Adverse drug reactions database; [Cited 2019 Mar 1]; Available
from: http://www.imi-protect.eu/adverseDrugReactions.shtml
21. US Food and Drug Administration. Data mining at FDA – white
paper; [Cited 2019 Mar 1]; Available from: https://www.fda.gov/
science-research/data-mining/data-mining-fda-white-paper
22. Caster O, Sandberg L, Bergvall T, et al. VigiRank for statistical signal
detection in pharmacovigilance: first results from prospective realworld use. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2017 Aug;26
(8):1006–1010.
• This paper provides a novel approach to statistical signal
detection that accounts not only for dispropionate reporting
patterns but other factors such as completeness, recency, as
well as the availability of case narratives
23. European Medicines Agency. Screening for adverse reactions in
Eudravigilance; [Cited 2019 Mar 1]; Available from: https://www.
ema.europa.eu/en/documents/other/screening-adverse-reactionseudravigilance_en.pdf

