Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Rev. Res., 55(1), March - April 2019; Article No. 01, Pages: 1-5

ISSN 0976 – 044X

Research Article

A Comparative Analysis of Adverse Drug Reaction Prediction Techniques
a*

b

Lakshmi K S , Vadivu G
Department of Information Technology, Rajagiri School of Engineering & Technology, Kochi, Kerala, India.
b
Department of Information Technology, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur, Chennai, India.
*Corresponding author’s E-mail: lekshmy.shalu@gmail.com
a

Received: 30-12-2018; Revised: 14-02-2019; Accepted: 25-02-2019.
ABSTRACT
Patients subjected to medical treatments are often susceptible to adverse drug reactions. Many comorbid disease conditions arise
as a result of adverse drug reactions which in turn increase the complexity of treatment procedures. Usually the side effects of a
drug are identified prior to its introduction into market. But many of the adverse reactions can be identified only after the postmarketing phase. Once the possible adverse reactions of a drug are known, then effective steps can be taken to alleviate the
reaction. The objective of this research is to compare the existing techniques used in the prediction of adverse reactions of drug by
combining information from electronic health records and online healthcare forums. Adverse reactions of drug are predicted using 4
separate classifiers: SVM, Naïve Bayes, Decision Tree and KNN. Individual classifiers were tested and the accuracy seemed to be
increased when using an ensemble of these classifiers. Among the 4 classifiers, SVM showed an accuracy of 84%. Usage of ensemble
classifier improved the accuracy to 87%.
Keywords: Support vector machine, Naïve Bayes, Decision Tree, KNN, LSTM, Adverse Drug Reaction.

INTRODUCTION

A

dverse drug reaction (ADR) is defined as a harmful
reaction caused by the intake of a medication.
ADRs may occur following a single dose or
prolonged administration of a drug or result from the
combination of two or more drugs. Large amount of
money and energy have to be invested for studying the
adverse effects of drugs. Adverse drug reactions are
different from side effects. Side effects of a drug can be
positive or negative; negative side-effects are considered
as Adverse Drug Reactions. If ADRs are not properly
diagnosed and treated, it can lead to harmful and fatal
health conditions.
Pharmacovigilance is the science and activities related to
understanding, detecting, assessing and preventing
adverse effects of drug-related problems. Usually the
adverse reactions of drugs are conducted in the postmarketing phases, even though it can be done during premarketing phase also. Recent advancements in
technology contributed large scale availability of text data
in social media and health related forums. Electronic
medical health records are also sources of text data.
These data sources can be used for pharmacovigilance
that helps in early detection and prevention of adverse
drug reactions which in turn can contribute to enhanced
survival rate.
Various researches have been conducted in the field of
pharmacovigilance during the past few years. During early
stages, data mining techniques were widely used for the
prediction of adverse drug reaction from electronic health
records and clinical reports. Ioannis Korkontzelos1 et al.
examined the scope of sentiment analysis based feature
extraction for locating ADR mentions from social media

and online health forums. They proved that adding
sentiment analysis features can slightly improve the
performance of ADR identification method. Hariprasad
Sampathkumar2 et.al presented a method for mining
ADRs from online health forums using Hidden Markov
Model. In this approach, they extracted messages from
online healthcare forums containing ADRs and further
processed these messages for finding out adverse drug
3
reactions. A.Pushpa et.al., utilized LSTM method to
overcome the difficulties in extracting the user post
having misspellings, abbreviations. This method proved
better than the existing machine learning techniques for
ADR prediction. Andy W. Chen4 et al. compared the
performance of different machine learning models for
predicting the ADR outcome. He used machine learning
techniques for predicting ADR based on patient
characteristics and drug usage. WenchengSun5 et.al.
discussed in detail about the processing of Electronic
Medical Records and the challenges involved in it. They
conducted a detailed study on the different kinds of data
mining techniques to extract information from EMR
database. Trung Huynh et al. proposed two neural
network models, Convolutional Recurrent Neural
Network (CRNN) and Convolutional Neural Network with
6
Attention (CNNA) for ADR classification . Experimental
results showed that all the Neural Network architectures
outperform the traditional Maximum Entropy classifiers
trained from n-grams with different weighting strategies
on ADE datasets. Stefanie Friedrich7 et al. conducted a
comparative study of machine learning algorithms for
adverse drug event classification from health records.
Three different supervised machine learning algorithms:
decision tree, random forest and LibSVM were compared
and found that LibSVM outperformed the other two

International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research
Available online at www.globalresearchonline.net
© Copyright protected. Unauthorised republication, reproduction, distribution, dissemination and copying of this document in whole or in part is strictly prohibited.

1

Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Rev. Res., 55(1), March - April 2019; Article No. 01, Pages: 1-5

algorithms. MertTiftikci8 et al. proposed hybrid deep
learning and dictionary-based approaches for extracting
Adverse Drug Reactions. They employed two different
methods for detecting mentions of type ADR, drug class,
animal, severity, factor, and negations from drug labels.
The neural network-based approach outperformed the
dictionary- and rule-based approach in extracting ADRs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Electronic Health Records
Electronic Health Record (EHR) stores the detailed
information of a patient in digital format. It includes the
demographics, history of past illness, past medications,
present problems, current medications, treatment plans,
radiology images and laboratory results. EHR allows
computerized access to information and has the potential
to streamline the clinician's workflow. It helps in instant
availability of information to authorized users in a
secured manner. Electronic Health Record serves as rich
sources of medical information which can be used for the
extraction of disease comorbidities, prediction of various
diseases and adverse drug reactions. In this work,
electronic health records collected from nearby hospitals
of Kochi has been used for finding adverse reactions of
drugs.
Online Health Forums
With the advancement in internet technology,
information sharing becomes effortless andrapid. People
use to share their information over internet through
various discussion forums. Nowadays, there are many
online health discussion forums where patients and
medical practitioners can share their knowledge and
experiences.Online health forums serves as a source of
health information, providing patients with a safe
environment to share experiences, seek information, and
improve their health knowledge. Careful analysis of
information from these health forums can used for better
treatment and patient care. Recently, many research
works have been conducted for extracting information
from online healthcare forums. Steadyhealth.com,
medications.com etc. are some of the online healthcare
forums which can be used for ADR prediction. Here, we
have used messages from medications.com.
Methods
Machine Learning Approach
The main sources of data are electronic health records,
collected from nearby hospitals in Kochi. Electronic health
records were collected after undergoing an ethics
committee approval. For collecting data from online
healthcare forum, the site that we have referred is
www.medications.com where people talk only about the
reactions that they had on having a certain drug for a
period of time.

ISSN 0976 – 044X

The overall architecture is given in Fig.1. EHRs and online
data are processed separately. For processing data from
EHRs, we have used the approach done in our previous
work9-10. In order to extract the required information
from the online health forum, an HTML parser is used.
Beautiful Soup is a python package used for parsing html
and xml documents. It creates a parse tree for parsed
pages that can be used to extract data from HTML tags,
which is useful for web scraping. The data collected from
the online healthcare forums are publicly available data.
Personally identifiable information of the forum users
were not collected or used in this study. After extracting
raw data from the data sources, data pre-processing is
done. Raw data contains a large amount of irrelevant data
like stop words (is, was, the etc.), punctuations which
needs to be removed. Here we used the natural language
toolkit, NLTK to filter out the irrelevant data. NLTK is a
suit of libraries and programs for symbolic and statistical
natural language processing (NLP) for English and is
written in the python programming language. After stop
word removal, punctuations are removed. This scraped
data is then stored in a text document format.
In the next phase, i.e. Named Entity Recognition phase,
entities of interest are identified and extracted. Here the
entities of interest are names of drugs and terms
denoting side effects. The online healthcare forums are
used by regular people without a medical background.
Therefore the terms used may not be those used by
experts in the medical field. In this regard, we constructed
a custom list of drugs and side effects that consist of
terms that are used by people who are not experts in the
field of medicine.
The 2 main phases in machine learning approach are:
Feature Extraction and Classification. Feature extraction
module is used to identify the presence of relationships
between the named entities in a given text.
Feature Extraction
Five types of features are extracted for performing
classification.
1.

N-grams: These are continuous sequences of n
tokens taken together at a time from the tweets for
analysis. We have chosen n as three in our
experiment.

2.

POS: Part of Speech (POS) of tokens indicates the
syntactic function of each token.

3.

Negation: Words mentioned in negative context
indicating adverse events

4.

Relative positions of drug names and terms denoting
adverse events

5.

TF-IDF weight

This weight is a statistical measure used in information
retrieval to estimate the importance of a word in a given
document. The importance increases proportionally to
the number of times a word appears in the document but

International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research
Available online at www.globalresearchonline.net
© Copyright protected. Unauthorised republication, reproduction, distribution, dissemination and copying of this document in whole or in part is strictly prohibited.

2

Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Rev. Res., 55(1), March - April 2019; Article No. 01, Pages: 1-5

is offset by the frequency of the word in the corpus. The
TF-IDF weight is composed of two terms: the first
computes the normalized Term Frequency (TF), the
second term is the Inverse Document Frequency (IDF).
The TF-IDF weight is calculated as the product of these 2
terms. In our experiment, while considering Electronic
Health Records, each record (record of a single patient) is
taken as a document and words in the document is
considered as terms and the entire records available are
taken as corpus. For the online health forum data, each
tweet/message is treated as a document and the entire
messages related to a particular medicine is treated as
corpus.
Term frequency related to a term, t is given as:
tf(t) = (Number of times term t appears in a document) /
(Total number of terms in the document)
Inverse Document frequency related to a term, t is given
as:
IDF(t) = loge (Total number of documents / Number of
documents with term t in it)
Classification
After extracting features, classification is done using 4
types of classifiers: Naïve Bayes, Decision Tree, KNN and
SVM. The overall architecture is shown in Fig.1.
Electronic
HealthRecords

Data from Online
Health Forums

Pre-processing

Feature Extraction

Training Data

UMLS

Test Data

Sampling with replacement to create 4 datasets

Lexicon
Naïve
Bayes

Decisio
n Tree

SVM

KNN

Final
Prediction

Majority Voting

Figure 1: Overall Architecture
Naïve Bayes classification is based on Bayes theorem. It
uses strong (naive) independence assumptions between
the features, which presume that an attribute value on a
given class is independent of the values of other
attributes. Naïve Bayes classifier predicts the probability
of outcome of an event as:

ISSN 0976 – 044X

where P(H) is the probability that the hypothesis H holds
for the observed data tuple X, P(X) is the prior probability
of training data X, P(H/X) is the probability of H given X
and P(X/H) is the probability of X given H.
K-nearest neighbour’s algorithm (k-NN) is a nonparametric method used for classification. Input consists
of k closest training examples in the feature space. The
output is a class membership. An object is classified by a
majority vote of its neighbours, with the object being
assigned to the class most common among its k nearest
neighbours (k is a positive integer, typically small). If k = 1,
then the object is simply assigned to the class of that
single nearest neighbour.
Decision Trees (DTs) are a non-parametric supervised
learning method used for classification and regression.
The goal is to create a model that predicts the value of a
target variable by learning simple decision rules inferred
from the data features. A decision tree is a graph that
uses a branching method to illustrate every possible
outcome of a decision. Each node of the tree denotes an
attribute.
Support Vector Machine is a supervised classification
learning algorithm. It is based on the concept of decision
planes that define decision boundaries. A decision plane
is one that separates between a set of objects having
different class memberships. SVM classifier finds the best
hyperplane for separating data points that belong to a
particular class from the data points of other classes.
An ensemble of these classifiers was used for enhancing
the accuracy of classification.The ensemble algorithm is
given in Fig.2:
Input: Dataset divided into training set (Tr) and test data
(Ts)
Step1: Set j=1
Step2: Set a counter for each of the classifier denoted as ci
initialized to 0.
Step3: Four random samples are created from Tr with
replacement
Step4: Each sample dataset of Tr is fed as input to the
classifier
Step5: Test the classifier with input Ts
Step6:If output of classifieri is positive increment ci
Step7: Shuffle the sample dataset of Tr among each
classifier and increment j
Step8: Repeat steps 2 to 8 till j=4
Step9: Set vote=0
Step10: If ci>2,then set output of classifieri as positive
otherwise negative
Step11: Increment the vote for each positive prediction
Step12: If vote>2 then the resultant class is positive
Elseif vote<2 then the resultant class is negative else
choose the output with the highest accuracy

Figure 2: Ensemble Algorithm

International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research
Available online at www.globalresearchonline.net
© Copyright protected. Unauthorised republication, reproduction, distribution, dissemination and copying of this document in whole or in part is strictly prohibited.

3

Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Rev. Res., 55(1), March - April 2019; Article No. 01, Pages: 1-5

ISSN 0976 – 044X

Deep Learning Approach
Deep Learning is a machine leaning approach based on
artificial neural network. A deep learning network
consists of an input layer, multiple hidden layers and an
output layer. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN),
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), Deep belief networks
and Generative adversarial networks are some of the
popular models of Deep Learning networks. RNN is
widely used for text analysis and hence we have chosen
LSTM, an improved version of RNN for ADR prediction.
RNNs make use of sequential information for text
processing. For each element in a sequence, RNNs repeat
the same task and hence they are called recurrent
networks. The output of the network depends on
previous computations. RNNs have a memory to store
information about previous computations. The
architecture for ADR prediction using LSTM is given in
Fig.3.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The performance of machine learning algorithms has
been compared. Table 1 shows the performance of
various algorithms. SVM is having higher accuracy
compared to Decision tree, Naive Bayes and KNN
classifiers. Using ensemble method has considerably
increased the performance. Fig.3. shows the graphical
comparison of the algorithms. LSTM showed an accuracy
of 86%.
Input Data

Figure 4: Comparison of algorithms

CONCLUSION
In this work, we have explored the different possibilities
for mining adverse drug reactions. Diverse data sets
including online health forums and electronic health
records are considered for prediction tasks. Data sets
were divided into training set and test set. Machine
learning techniques, SVM, Naive Bayes, Decision tree and
KNN methods are used for classification. An ensemble of
these classifiers was also developed which showed an
increased performance compared to individual classifier.
Latest technique of deep learning is also used for ADR
prediction using LSTM network. LSTM performed well
compared to other classifiers, but the accuracy was less
compared to ensemble approach. As future work, we
could develop a dictionary with the predictions which can
be further analysed for finding disease comorbidities.
REFERENCES

Preprocessing

1.

Ioannis Korkontzelos, Azadeh Nikfarjam, Matthew
Shardlow, Abeed Sarker, Sophia Ananiadou, Graciela
H. Gonzalez “Analysis of the effect of sentiment
analysis on extracting adverse drug reactions from
tweets and forum posts” Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, 62, 2016, 148–158.

2.

Hariprasad Sampathkumar, Xue-wen Chen and Bo
Luo, “Mining Adverse Drug Reactions from
onlinehealthcare forums using Hidden Markov
Model”,
BMC
Medical
Informatics
and
DecisionMaking, 14, 2014, 91.

3.

A.Pushpa, S.Kamakshi, “Enhancing the extraction of
adverse
drug
reactions
using
deep
learningtechnique” International Journal of Pure and
Applied Mathematics, Volume 118 No. 20, 2018, 495504.

4.

Andy W. Chen “Predicting adverse drug reaction
outcomes with machine learning” International
Journal of Community Medicine and Public Health,
5(3), 2018 Mar, 901-904.

5.

Wencheng Sun, ZhipingCai, Yangyang Li, Fang Liu,
Shengqun Fang and Guoyan Wang “Data Processing
and Text Mining Technologies on Electronic Medical
Records: A Review” Hindawi Journal of Healthcare

Feature
Extraction

Word
Embeddings

LSTM
Network

Prediction

Figure 3: Architecture using LSTM Network
Table 1: Performance of Machine Learning Algorithms
Naïve Decision
Bayes
Tree

KNN

SVM

Ensemble
Method

Accuracy

0.822

0.827

0.81

0.84

0.87

Precision

0.75

0.71

0.68

0.77

0.81

Recall

0.48

0.50

0.45

0.54

0.59

F-Score

0.59

0.58

0.54

0.64

0.68

Parameter

International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research
Available online at www.globalresearchonline.net
© Copyright protected. Unauthorised republication, reproduction, distribution, dissemination and copying of this document in whole or in part is strictly prohibited.

4

Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Rev. Res., 55(1), March - April 2019; Article No. 01, Pages: 1-5

Engineering, Volume 2018, Article ID 4302425, 9
pages.
6.

7.

8.

Trung Huynh, Yulan He, Alistair Willis and Stefan
Ruger “Adverse Drug Reaction Classification With
Deep Neural Networks” Proceedings of COLING 2016,
the 26th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics: Technical Papers, Osaka, Japan,
December 11-17, 2016, pages 877–887.
Stefanie Friedrich and Hercules Dalianis ‘Adverse
drug event classification of health records using
dictionary-based pre-processing and machine
learning” Proceedings of the Sixth International
Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information
Analysis (Louhi), pages 121–130, Lisbon, Portugal, 17
September 2015. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
MertTiftikci, ArzucanÖzgür, Yongqun He, and
JungukHur “Extracting Adverse Drug Reactions using

ISSN 0976 – 044X

DeepLearning and Dictionary Based Approaches”
TAC, 2017.
9.

Lakshmi K.S, G.Vadivu, “Extracting Association Rules
from Medical Health Records Using Multi-Criteria
Decision Analysis”, Procedia Computer Science,
Volume 115, 2017, Pages 290-295.

10. Lakshmi K.S, G. Santhosh Kumar, “Association rule
extraction from medical transcripts of diabetic
patients”, Proceedings of the fifth International
Conference on the Applications of Digital Information
and Web Technologies (ICADIWT 2014).
11. Mingyong Liuand Jiangang Yang, “An improvement of
TFIDF weighting in text categorization”, International
Conference on Computer Technology and Science
(ICCTS 2012) IPCSIT vol. 47, (2012).
12. Hyon Hee Kimand Kiyon Rhew “Analysis of Adverse
Drug Reaction Reports using Text Mining” Korean J
Clin Pharm, Vol. 27, No. 4, 2017.

Source of Support: Nil, Conflict of Interest: None.

International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Review and Research
Available online at www.globalresearchonline.net
© Copyright protected. Unauthorised republication, reproduction, distribution, dissemination and copying of this document in whole or in part is strictly prohibited.

5

