CLINICAL REPORT

Pegloticase

CLINICAL REPORT

William M. Gentry, Michael P. Dotson, Brian S. Williams, Melissa Hartley,
Kristen R. Stafford, Michael B. Bottorff, and Pranav K. Gandhi

G

out affects approximately 8
million people in the United
States.1 Of these, about 120,000
patients cope with a condition
known as refractory chronic gout, as
their serum uric acid levels are not
normalized with conventional gout
therapies or oral xanthine oxidase
inhibitors.2-4
The American College of Rheumatology’s recommendations to manage
gout highlight patient education on
the disease, diet, lifestyle, and treatment objectives. 4 The guidelines
recommend that patients achieve a
healthy weight, exercise, stop smoking, stay well hydrated, and eat a
healthy diet overall, listing the foods
and beverages whose consumption
should be limited. Pharmacologic
urate-lowering therapies are recommended for patients who have
been diagnosed with gouty arthritis and also have tophus, frequent
attacks, and past urolithiasis.4 The
first-line pharmacologic urate-lowering therapy for chronic gout is a
xanthine oxidase inhibitor such as
allopurinol or febuxostat in order
to achieve a serum urate concen-

Purpose. Pegloticase-associated adverse
events reported to the Food and Drug
Administration Adverse Event Reporting
System (FAERS) database in the United
States were evaluated.
Methods. Retrospective data-mining analysis of FAERS case reports listing Krystexxa
or pegloticase as the suspect drug and
specific adverse events (cardiovascular
events, infusion-related reactions, gout
flares, and anaphylaxis) was conducted
from the drug’s approval date (September
14, 2010) through August 27, 2012. Initial
and follow-up reports with the same primary linked identiﬁcation number were
identified as unique to each patient case.
When multiple reports for the same patient
were identified with a common case number, the report with the most recent date
was used to eliminate duplicate reports.
Bayesian confidence propagation neural
network methodology was used to identify
signals of drug-associated adverse events.
A potential signal for drug–adverse event
reports is generated when the lower limit

tration of <6 mg/dL, with optimal
concentrations below 5 mg/dL. Probenecid, an antihyperuricemic agent,
is recommended as an alternative

William M. Gentry, Pharm.D., is Assistant Professor and Executive
Associate Dean; Michael P. Dotson is Pharm.D. candidate; Brian
S. Williams is Pharm.D. candidate; Melissa Hartley is Pharm.D.
candidate; Kristen R. Stafford is Pharm.D. candidate;
Michael B. Bottorff, Pharm.D., FCCP, CLS, is Professor and Chair
of Pharmacy Practice; and Pranav K. Gandhi, Ph.D., is Assistant
Professor, Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy,
South College, Knoxville, TN.

722

Am J Health-Syst Pharm—Vol 71 May 1, 2014

of the 95% two-sided confidence interval
of the information component is greater
than 0.
Results. A total of 118 unique cases of
adverse events involving pegloticase in
the United States were identified during
the study period. Fourteen reports were
related to pegloticase-associated cardiovascular events, and 35 were related to
pegloticase-associated infusion-related
reactions. Twenty-six reports were related
to pegloticase-associated gout, and 11
were reports of pegloticase-associated
anaphylaxis. Bayesian statistics identified potential signals for all pegloticaseassociated adverse events (cardiovascular
events, infusion reactions, gout flares, and
anaphylaxis).
Conclusion. Analysis of pegloticaseassociated adverse events submitted to the
FAERS database found that cardiovascular
events, infusion-related reactions, gout
flares, and anaphylaxis occurred more
frequently than was statistically expected.
Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 2014; 71:722-7

first-line pharmacologic treatment
in the presence of a contraindication to or patient intolerance of at
least one xanthine oxidase inhibitor.4

Address correspondence to Dr. Gandhi (pgandhi@southcollege
tn.edu).
The authors have declared no potential conflicts of interest.
Copyright © 2014, American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc. All rights reserved. 1079-2082/14/0501-0722$06.00.
DOI 10.2146/ajhp130571

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/article/71/9/722/5111251 by Harvard Law School Library user on 01 October 2021

Investigation of pegloticase-associated adverse
events from a nationwide reporting system database

CLINICAL REPORT

reactions associated with pegloticase
include anaphylaxis, infusion reactions, gout flares, and adverse cardiovascular events.2,9 FDA required the
implementation of the risk evaluation and mitigation strategy (REMS)
to inform health care providers and
patients about the risk of anaphylaxis and infusion reactions, the risk
associated with coadministration
of pegloticase and other oral uratelowering therapies, and the contraindication of pegloticase use in patients
with glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.11
Although the role of health care
professionals may vary with respect
to their involvement and fulfillment
of the REMS requirements, hospitalbased physicians, pharmacists, and
other health care professionals serve
an important role in the prevention
of medication errors and adverse
events in a hospital or components
of a health system.12 The potential
to collect and report patient information with respect to known and
unknown adverse events can provide
valuable information, especially
when reporting the potential risk of
serious adverse events with particular
drugs.
Health care professionals are encouraged to report all adverse events
suspected to be associated with the
use of pegloticase. However, to the
best of our knowledge, no postmarketing data have been collected
regarding pegloticase-associated
adverse events in the United States.
The purpose of this study was to
identify potential cases of pegloticaseassociated adverse events in the
United States using the FDA Adverse
Event Reporting System (FAERS)
database.
Methods
Adverse-event data set. FAERS,
formerly known as the Adverse Event
Reporting System, is a spontaneous reporting system that contains
information on adverse events and
medication-error reports for FDA-

approved drugs and therapeutic
biological agents. Data on adverse
events and medication errors can
voluntarily be reported by health
care professionals and consumers to
FDA and drug manufacturers in the
United States.13 If a drug manufacturer receives a report of an adverse
event or a medication-error report,
mandatory-reporting guidelines
require the company to provide the
information to FDA.13 Data stored
in the FAERS database on adverse
events and medication errors include
information about patient demographics (e.g., age, sex), the implicated drug, the patient’s reaction to
the drug, the patient’s outcome, start
dates and end dates of drug therapy,
adverse events coded and reviewed in
accordance with the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities preferred
terms, indications for use (diagnoses) of the implicated drug, and the
source of the report.
Search strategy. Adverse-event
and medication-error reports were
extracted from the FAERS, with
duplicate reports removed to eliminate repetition. Initial and followup reports with the same primary
linked identiﬁcation number were
identified as unique to each patient
case. When multiple reports for the
same patient were identified with a
common case number, the report
with the most recent date was used
to eliminate duplicate reports. Only
cases that occurred in the United
States were identified to remove any
discrepancy caused by the FDA requirements for reporting data and
different systems for postmarketing
surveillance in foreign countries.
Based on information in the prescribing label and randomized controlled trials, pegloticase is associated
with anaphylaxis, infusion reactions,
gout flares, and congestive heart failure.14 Consistent with these adverse
events, case reports were identified
when the reported adverse events
were comparable to the selected
Medical Dictionary for Regulatory

Am J Health-Syst Pharm—Vol 71 May 1, 2014

723

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/article/71/9/722/5111251 by Harvard Law School Library user on 01 October 2021

Antiinflammatory agents such as
oral colchicine (0.5 or 0.6 mg once
or twice daily), low-dose nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (e.g.,
naproxen 250 mg orally twice daily),
and low-dose (defined as ≤10 mg/
day) prednisone or prednisolone are
also recommended for the prophylaxis of gout attacks.4,5 For patients
whose serum uric acid goals have not
been achieved by appropriate xanthine oxidase inhibitor dosing, the
combination of oral urate-lowering
therapy with a xanthine oxidase inhibitor agent and a uricosuric agent
(e.g., probenecid) is recommended.4
Pegloticase (Krystexxa, Savient
Pharmaceuticals, East Brunswick,
NJ), a pegylated uric acid-specific
enzyme, was approved on September 14, 2010, by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA).2,3 Pegloticase
catalyzes the conversion of urate to
allantoin, which in turn reduces serum urate levels.2,3 Pegloticase, with
a recommended dose of 8 mg given
as an i.v. infusion every two weeks,
is indicated as a third-line therapy to
treat adult patients with chronic gout
refractory to or who cannot tolerate
conventional oral xanthine oxidase
inhibitors and uricosuric agents.2-4
Pegloticase is the first and only agent
approved for the treatment of refractory chronic gout in adult patients6
and offers an important new option
to approximately 120,000 adults with
refractory chronic gout in the United
States.7 It is also the only gout treatment with proven efficacy for tophus
resolution within six months.8
Without achieving normalized
serum uric acid levels, many patients
develop severe chronic gout.9 This
condition is characterized by recurrent flares, chronic arthritis, and
enlarged tophi, which can lead to
impaired functional status and lower
health-related quality of life.9 The
safety and efficacy of pegloticase were
evaluated in two randomized, Phase
III, placebo-controlled trials2,9 and
a Phase IIIb, open-label, extension
study.10 The most serious adverse

Pegloticase

CLINICAL REPORT

Pegloticase

724

the IC value include the number of
unique drug reports, the number
of speciﬁc adverse events, the number of speciﬁc drug–adverse event
combination reports, and the total
number of reports in the database.
BCPNN applies a prior Dirichlet
distribution that allows closed-form
expressions for the posterior distributions and associated posterior
intervals.15-17 This approach enables
calculation of both the point estimate, also indicated as the IC, and its
95% conﬁdence interval (CI) for the
particular drug–adverse event combination reports. Positive IC values
and higher IC values suggest a greater
likelihood that the particular drug–
adverse event was reported more
often in the database than statistically
expected in the database.15,16 An IC
of 0 demonstrates a lack of quantitative association between the drug
and a particular adverse event. On
the other hand, negative IC values
suggest that the drug–adverse event
was reported less than statistically expected in the database.15,16 Signals or
an association for the specific drug–
adverse event was demonstrated
when the lower limit of a two-sided
95% CI of the IC (IC025) is greater
than 0.15-17 The signal or association
was defined as having the “potential
for further investigation” since each
drug–adverse event report requires
additional clinical investigation.
Bayesian statistics were reported for
the specific pegloticase-associated
adverse events previously discussed:
cardiovascular events, infusionrelated reactions, gout flares, and
anaphylaxis.
A retrospective data-mining analysis was applied to the FAERS database
for pegloticase from its FDA approval
date in the United States (September
14, 2010) through August 27, 2012,
the latest data available at the time this
study was conducted.
Results
A total of 835,835 unique case
reports in the United States were

Am J Health-Syst Pharm—Vol 71 May 1, 2014

identified during the study period (September 14, 2010–August
27, 2012), as were 118 patients treated
with pegloticase. We identified 49,401
reports of cardiovascular events and
2,563 reports of infusion-related
reactions from the FAERS database.
Of these, 14 reports were related to
pegloticase-associated cardiovascular
events (IC025 = 0.15), and 35 were related to pegloticase-associated infusionrelated reactions (IC025 = 4.87). Totals
of 2,166 and 1,042 reports of gout and
anaphylaxis, respectively, were identified from FAERS. Of these, 26 were
reports of pegloticase-associated gout
(IC025 = 4.75) and 11 were reports of
pegloticase-associated anaphylaxis
(IC025 = 2.88). Data regarding age, sex,
outcome, concomitant medications,
and indication or comorbid conditions for pegloticase-associated adverse events (anaphylaxis, gout flares,
cardiovascular events, and infusionrelated reactions) were collected (results available upon request).
Other adverse events reported
in patients using pegloticase were
decreased therapeutic response (n =
23), condition aggravated (n = 9),
dyspnea (n = 7), nausea (n = 5), and
acute renal failure (n = 4). Bayesian
statistics identified potential signals
for particular cases of pegloticaseassociated decreased therapeutic
response (IC = 4.53, IC025 = 3.90),
pegloticase-associated condition aggravated (IC = 2.87, IC025 = 1.82),
and pegloticase-associated acute
renal failure (IC = 1.92, IC 025 =
0.24). Signals were not identified
for cases of pegloticase-associated
dyspnea (IC = 0.81, IC025 = –0.39)
and pegloticase-associated nausea
(IC = –0.02, IC025 = –1.48). Other adverse events associated with the use
of pegloticase that were identified in
fewer than four patients were numerous and are listed in Appendix C.
Discussion
BCPNN analysis generated a potential signal as evidenced by an IC025
of greater than 0 (IC025 = 0.15), in-

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/article/71/9/722/5111251 by Harvard Law School Library user on 01 October 2021

Activities preferred terms available
from the FAERS database. A single
term representing cardiovascular
events and infusion-related reactions
was created to identify the adverse
events that may have been related to
these terms. The individual preferred
terms that were combined into a single term representing cardiovascular
events and infusion-related reactions
are presented in Appendix A and
B, respectively. Adverse events specific for cardiovascular events and
infusion-related reactions were
selected and combined to educate
patients and health care professionals
regarding distinct events that measure the same concept. Reports of
gout and anaphylaxis (combination
of the preferred terms anaphylactic
reaction and anaphylactic shock) were
also collected, as were all adverse
events reported to the FAERS associated with pegloticase. This process allowed for the comprehensive
identification and evaluation of all
potential adverse events associated
with pegloticase from the FAERS
database. Reports listing Krystexxa
and pegloticase as the suspect drug
(primary suspect, secondary suspect,
or concomitant suspects) were extracted from the FAERS database.
Data-mining methodology. Several studies have applied data-mining
algorithms to investigate potential
signals indicating safety problems for
specific drug–adverse event combinations reported in the FAERS database.15-17 Signals indicate an excess of
adverse events compared with what
is expected to be associated with
the specific product.18 Data-mining
algorithms detect such signals.
One such method, the Bayesian
confidence propagation neural network (BCPNN), has been shown to
highlight signals of drug-associated
adverse events.15-17 BCPNN uses a
measure of disproportionality called
the information component (IC)
to demonstrate the association between the specific drug and adverse
event. The variables used to calculate

CLINICAL REPORT

reported in gout patients at the start
of urate-lowering therapy. The occurrence of gout flares is linked to
a rapid decrease of serum uric acid
levels, which leads to mobilization
and dissolution of monosodium
urate crystals that were stored in the
tissue.2 Another major adverse event
associated with the use of pegloticase
in randomized placebo-controlled
clinical trials was an infusion-related
reaction.2,9 It is worthy to note that
placebo-controlled clinical trials
cited an injection reaction as the
number one reason for participant
withdrawal from the study and that
at least 90% of participants experienced at least one adverse event with
pegloticase.9 The release of different
cytokines or the presence of anti­
pegloticase antibodies is one plausible explanation for the occurrence
of infusion-related reactions.2 Also,
the risk of infusion-related reactions has been shown to be higher in
gout patients who could not achieve
serum uric acid goals (serum urate
concentration of <6 mg/dL). Anaphylaxis reactions identified during
infusion, typically within the first
two hours, were also reported in the
clinical trials.2 Overall, the other adverse events that occurred in clinical
trials closely paralleled the adverse
events identified from the FAERS database. However, potential signals for
specific pegloticase-associated adverse events—decreased therapeutic
response, condition aggravated, and
acute renal failure—were identified
in this study. Future pharmacoepidemiologic studies are necessary to
investigate and closely monitor these
adverse events associated with the
use of pegloticase, especially since
the goal of the pegloticase REMS is
to inform health care providers and
patients about the risk of anaphylaxis
and infusion-related reactions.
The BCPNN method was used
in this study to generate hypotheses
and identify potential signals, not to
draw final conclusions with respect
to specific adverse events associ-

ated with the use of pegloticase. The
use of BCPNN methodology when
identifying drug-associated adverse
events reported in fewer than four
patients has previously been questioned; however, this seldom influences the application of pairwise IC
analysis to identify potential signals
of drug-associated adverse events.15,16
BCPNN is an effective tool for use in
postmarketing studies, and several
studies have shown the application
of this procedure to generate signals between the specific drug and
adverse event. 15-17,20,21 Limitations
should be noted when interpreting
and applying these study findings.
The differential reporting of a specific adverse event associated with a
drug is likely to vary over time, from
drug to drug, and among therapeutic drug classes.20 Several individual
preferred terms were combined into
two separate combination adverse
event terms: cardiovascular events
and infusion-related reactions. The
definition of these adverse events
may depend on the clinical and research purposes of the study in question. In FAERS, a reporting source
may identify a specific adverse event
as several different symptoms, whereas another reporting source may
identify the same as a single adverse
event. To reduce duplication and
redundancy, cases reporting various individual preferred terms used
to define cardiovascular events or
infusion reactions were identified
as a unique patient case. Notwithstanding the inherent limitations
and biases reported with use of
voluntary reporting data sets such
as FAERS, BCPNN methodology
identified potential signals for specific adverse events associated with
the use of pegloticase in the United
States.15,22
Conclusion
Analysis of pegloticase-associated
adverse events submitted to the
FAERS database found that cardiovascular events, infusion-related re-

Am J Health-Syst Pharm—Vol 71 May 1, 2014

725

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/article/71/9/722/5111251 by Harvard Law School Library user on 01 October 2021

dicating that pegloticase-associated
cardiovascular events were reported
to the FAERS database more frequently than statistically expected in
the database. Our results are consistent with findings from two Phase
III, randomized, placebo-controlled
clinical trials.2,9 The randomized controlled trials have found that more
patients had cardiovascular events
(assessed with the Antiplatelet Trialists’ Collaboration composite of endpoints) when receiving pegloticase
versus placebo, but the difference was
not significant.9 It is unclear why adverse cardiovascular events occurred
in patients treated with pegloticase in
the placebo-controlled clinical trials,
but two explanations have been proposed.2 One possible explanation is
that the use of high-dose corticosteroids before receiving the pegloticase
infusion may have caused the adverse
cardiovascular events.2,19 The other
possible explanation is that the patients participating in these clinical
trials had underlying risk factors for
cardiovascular events. The FAERS
database does not provide information relevant to underlying comorbid risk factors for cardiovascular
events nor does it report any prior
use of medications. Future studies
should investigate if these risk factors are associated with an increased
frequency of cardiovascular events.
Previous reports of an increased
rate of cardiovascular events among
patients treated with pegloticase and
the potential signals identified in our
study suggest the need for continued
surveillance.
Potential signals were also
identified for specific pegloticaseassociated adverse events, including
gout (IC025 = 4.75), infusion-related
reactions (IC025 = 4.87), and anaphylaxis (IC025 = 2.88). Our results
are consistent with the two Phase
III, randomized, placebo-controlled
clinical trials that found gout flare to
be the most common adverse event
among patients treated with pegloticase. 9 Gout flares are commonly

Pegloticase

CLINICAL REPORT

Pegloticase

actions, gout flares, and anaphylaxis
occurred more frequently than was
statistically expected.
References

726

Appendix A—Cardiovascular-related
preferred terms from FAERS used in this
studya
Acute coronary syndrome
Acute myocardial infarction
Angina pectoris
Arrhythmia
Cardiac arrest
Cardiac arrhythmia
Cardiac death

Am J Health-Syst Pharm—Vol 71 May 1, 2014

Cardiac thrombus
Cerebral revascularization
Cerebrovascular accident
Chronic cardiac failure
Chronic heart failure
Congestive cardiac failure
Congestive heart failure
Coronary artery disease
Coronary artery occlusion
Coronary artery thrombosis
Coronary revascularization
Deep vein thrombosis
Deep venous thrombosis
Embolic stroke
Fatal myocardial infarction
Hemorrhagic stroke
Intracardiac thrombus
Ischemic cerebral infarction
Ischemic stroke
Myocardial infarction
Myocardial ischemia
Peripheral arterial embolism
Peripheral arterial occlusion
Peripheral arterial occlusive disease
Peripheral artery disease
Pulmonary embolism
Resuscitated cardiac arrest
Sudden cardiac death
Transient ischemic attack
Unstable angina
Venous thromboembolism
Venous thromboembolism death
Venous thrombosis
a
FAERS = Food and Drug Administration Adverse
Event Reporting System.

Appendix B—Infusion-related preferred
terms from FAERS used in this studya
Infusion related reaction
Infusion site abscess
Infusion site atrophy
Infusion site cellulitis
Infusion site coldness
Infusion site cyst
Infusion site dermatitis
Infusion site discoloration
Infusion site discomfort
Infusion site edema
Infusion site erosion
Infusion site erythema
Infusion site exfoliation
Infusion site extravasation
Infusion site hematoma
Infusion site hemorrhage
Infusion site hypersensitivity
Infusion site induration
Infusion site infection
Infusion site inflammation
Infusion site irritation
Infusion site ischemia
Infusion site mass
Infusion site necrosis
Infusion site pain
Infusion site paraesthesia
Infusion site phlebitis
Infusion site pruritus
Infusion site pustule

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/article/71/9/722/5111251 by Harvard Law School Library user on 01 October 2021

1. Savient Pharmaceuticals. What is refractory chronic gout (RCG)? www.krystex
xa.com/about_refractor y_chronic_
gout.aspx (accessed 2013 Aug 30).
2. Ea HK, Richette P. Critical appraisal of
the role of pegloticase in the management
of gout. Open Access Rheumatol Res Rev.
2012; 4:63-70.
3. Food and Dr ug Administr ation.
Krystexxa (pegloticase) for intravenous
infusion. Briefing document for arthritis advisory committee. www.fda.gov/
d ow n l o a d s / Adv i s o r y Co m m i t te e s /
CommitteesMeetingMaterials/Drugs/
ArthritisAdvisor yCommittee/
UCM165814.pdf (accessed 2013 Aug 30).
4. Khanna D, Fitzgerald JD, Khanna PP et
al. 2012 American College of Rheumatology guidelines for management of gout.
Part I: systematic nonpharmacologic and
pharmacologic therapeutic approaches to
hyperuricemia. Arthritis Care Res. 2012;
64:1431-46.
5. Khanna D, Khanna PP, Fitzgerald JD et al.
2012 American College of Rheumatology
guidelines for management of gout. Part
II: therapy and antiinflammatory prophylaxis of acute gouty arthritis. Arthritis
Care Res. 2012; 64:1447-61.
6. Savient Pharmaceuticals. Savient Pharmaceuticals announces permanent
J-code assigned for Krystexxa. http://
investor.savient.com/releasedetail.cfm?
ReleaseID=637527 (accessed 2013 Nov
10).
7. Waknine Y. FDA approves pegloticase
for refractory gout. www.medscape.com/
viewarticle/728557 (accessed 2013 Nov
10).
8. Savient Pharmaceuticals. Krystexxa
(pegloticase). Phase 3 clinical trial
data, secondary endpoint—tophus resolution. www.krystexxa.com/hcp/tophus_
response.aspx (accessed 2013 Nov 10).
9. Sundy JS, Baraf HS, Yood RA et al. Efficacy and tolerability of pegloticase for
the treatment of chronic gout in patients
refractory to conventional treatment:
two randomized controlled trials. JAMA.
2011; 306:711-20.
10. Hamburger SA, Lipsky PE, Khanna D
et al. Safety and efficacy of long-term
pegloticase (Krystexxa) treatment in
adult patients with chronic gout refractory to conventional therapy. Paper
presented at 12th Annual Congress of the
European League Against Rheumatism.
London; 2011 May.
11. Food and Drug Administration. Risk
evaluation and mitigation strategy (REMS) for Krystexxa (pegloticase). www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/
DrugSafet y/PostmarketDrugSafet y
InformationforPatientsandProviders/
UCM227955.pdf (accessed 2013 Aug 30).

12. Shane R. Risk evaluation and mitigation
strategies: impact on patients, health
care providers, and health systems. Am
J Health-Syst Pharm. 2009; 66(suppl
7):S6-12.
13. Food and Drug Administration. FDA
Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS)
(formerly AERS). www.fda.gov/Drugs/
GuidanceComplianceRegulator y
Information/Surveillance/AdverseDrug
Effects/default.htm (accessed 2013 Aug
30).
14. Savient Pharmaceuticals. Krystexxa
(pegloticase). Highlights of prescribing information. www.savient
pharma.com/pdf/KRYSTEXXA%20
Prescribing%20Information.pdf
(accessed 2013 Aug 30).
15. Gandhi PK, Gentry WM, Bottorff MB.
Cardiovascular thromboembolic events
associated with febuxostat: investigation
of cases from the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System database. Semin Arthritis
Rheum. 2013; 42:562-6.
16. Noren GN, Bate A, Orre R et al. Extending the methods used to screen the WHO
drug safety database towards analysis
of complex associations and improved
accuracy for rare events. Stat Med. 2006;
25:3740-57.
17. Van Puijenbroek EP, Bate A, Leufkens
HM et al. A comparison of measures of
disproportionality for signal detection
in spontaneous reporting systems for adverse drug reactions. Pharmacoepidemiol
Drug Saf. 2002; 11:3-10.
18. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry: good pharmacovigilance practices and pharmacovigilance
assessment. www.fda.gov/downloads/
regulator y information/guidances/
ucm126834.pdf (accessed 2013 Nov 10).
19. Ea HK, Chales G, Liote F. Pegloticase and
chronic gout. JAMA. 2011; 306:1979-80.
Letter.
20. Ratcliffe S, Younus M, Hauben M et al.
Antidepressants that inhibit neuronal
norepinephrine reuptake are not associated with increased spontaneous reporting of cardiomyopathy. J Psychopharmacol. 2010; 24:503-11.
21. Bate A, Lindquist M, Edwards IR et al. A
Bayesian neural network method for adverse drug reaction signal generation. Eur
J Clin Pharmacol. 1998; 54:315-21.
22. Hauben M, Reich L, Gerrits CM. Reports of hyperkalemia after publication
of RALES—a pharmacovigilance study.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2006;
15:775-83.

CLINICAL REPORT

a
FAERS = Food and Drug Administration Adverse
Event Reporting System.

Appendix C—List of other adverse
events associated with pegloticase
Therapeutic response decreased (23)
Condition aggravated (9)
Dyspnea (7)
Nausea (5)
Acute renal failure (4)
Arthralgia (3)
Asthenia (3)
Back pain (3)
Increased serum creatinine (3)
Increased serum uric acid (3)
Chest discomfort (3)
Chest pain (3)
Diarrhea (3)
Dizziness (3)
Drug ineffective (3)
Decreased hemoglobin (3)
Hemolysis (3)
Fatigue (3)
Headache (3)
Hepatotoxicity (3)
Pyrexia (3)
Rash (3)
Urinary incontinence (3)
Pruritus (3)
Vomiting (3)
Anemia (2)
Increased brain natriuretic peptide (2)
Contusion (2)
Convulsion (2)
Dehydration (2)
Diabetes mellitus (2)
Dyspepsia (2)
Urinary tract infection due to Escherichia coli (2)
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage (2)
Decreased hematocrit (2)
Hepatic failure (2)
Hepatocellular injury (2)
Hypothyroidism (2)

Malaise (2)
Methemoglobinemia (2)
Muscle spasms (2)
Musculoskeletal stiffness (2)
Peripheral edema (2)
Pain (2)
Septic shock (2)
Somnolence (2)
Ventricular tachycardia (2)
Weight decreased (2)
Abdominal distention (1)
Acute prerenal failure (1)
Affect lability (1)
Alopecia (1)
Anaphylactoid reaction (1)
Angioedema (1)
Antibiotic-resistant staphylococcus test,
positive (1)
Anuria (1)
Arthritis (1)
Blood alkaline phosphatase increased (1)
Blood blister (1)
Blood glucose increased (1)
Blood lactic acid increased (1)
Blood potassium increased (1)
Blood pressure decreased (1)
Abnormal breath sounds (1)
Bronchitis (1)
Bruxism (1)
Burning sensation (1)
Staphylococcal cellulitis (1)
Choking sensation (1)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (1)
Cold sweat (1)
Confusional state (1)
Constipation (1)
Cough (1)
Culture positive (1)
Cyanosis (1)
Depressed level of consciousness (1)
Depression (1)
Diverticulum (1)
Decreased drug effect (1)
Drug interaction (1)
Drug intolerance (1)
Dysphonia (1)
Ejection fraction decreased (1)
Embolic stroke (1)
Erythema (1)
Eye pain (1)
Feeling hot (1)
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency (1)

Hemodialysis (1)
Hemolytic anemia (1)
Hepatic function abnormal (1)
Hyperglycemia (1)
Hypersensitivity (1)
Hypertension (1)
Ileus (1)
Incorrect dose administered (1)
Inflammation (1)
Influenzalike illness (1)
Insomnia (1)
Ischemic hepatitis (1)
Joint injury (1)
Joint stiffness (1)
Lactic acidosis (1)
Leukocytosis (1)
Liver function test abnormal (1)
Loss of consciousness (1)
Lung disorder (1)
Mental status changes (1)
Nasal discomfort (1)
Nephrogenic anemia (1)
Nephrolithiasis (1)
Organizing pneumonia (1)
Osteomyelitis (1)
Palpitations (1)
Pharyngitis (1)
Platelet count decreased (1)
Platelet count increased (1)
Pneumonia (1)
Pneumothorax (1)
Pruritus generalized (1)
Pulseless electrical activity (1)
Red blood cell schistocytes present (1)
Renal failure (1)
Renal failure chronic (1)
Respiratory arrest (1)
Respiratory failure (1)
Respiratory rate decreased (1)
Sepsis (1)
Skin discoloration (1)
Staphylococcal infection (1)
Stupor (1)
Therapeutic response unexpected (1)
Thrombosis (1)
Tonic convulsion (1)
Transaminases increased (1)
Treatment noncompliance (1)
Urticaria (1)
Ventricular fibrillation (1)
Visual impairment (1)
Weight increased (1)

Am J Health-Syst Pharm—Vol 71 May 1, 2014

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajhp/article/71/9/722/5111251 by Harvard Law School Library user on 01 October 2021

Infusion site rash
Infusion site reaction
Infusion site scar
Infusion site swelling
Infusion site thrombosis
Infusion site ulcer
Infusion site urticarial
Infusion site vesicles
Infusion site warmth

Pegloticase

727

