SHORT COMMUNICATION

Drug Safety 2002; 25 (6): 393-397
0114-5916/02/0006-0393/$25.00/0
© Adis International Limited. All rights reserved.

A Data Mining Approach for Signal
Detection and Analysis
Andrew Bate,1,2 Marie Lindquist,1 I. Ralph. Edwards1 and Roland Orre 3
1 The Uppsala Monitoring Centre, WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden
2 Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Umea University, Umea, Sweden
3 Department of Mathematical Statistics, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden

Abstract

The WHO database contains over 2.5 million case reports, analysis of this data
set is performed with the intention of signal detection. This paper presents an
overview of the quantitative method used to highlight dependencies in this data
set.
The method Bayesian confidence propagation neural network (BCPNN) is
used to highlight dependencies in the data set. The method uses Bayesian statistics
implemented in a neural network architecture to analyse all reported drug adverse
reaction combinations.
This method is now in routine use for drug adverse reaction signal detection.
Also this approach has been extended to highlight drug group effects and look
for higher order dependencies in the WHO data.
Quantitatively unexpectedly strong relationships in the data are highlighted
relative to general reporting of suspected adverse effects; these associations are
then clinically assessed.

According to the WHO, an adverse drug reaction signal is ‘Reported information on a possible
causal relationship between an adverse event and
a drug, the relationship being unknown or incompletely documented previously’.[1] A signal is
an evaluated association between a drug and an
adverse drug reaction, which is considered important to investigate further, and which may refer to
new information on an already known association.
Usually more than a single report is required to
generate a signal, depending upon the seriousness
of the event and the quality of the information.
The role of the Uppsala Monitoring Centre[2] is
to detect such signals from a database of spontane-

ously reported case reports of suspected adverse
drug reactions (ADRs). The case reports are sent
from the 67 member countries of the WHO Programme for International Drug Monitoring.
1. Old System of Signal Detection
Previously, every 3 months, lists of new drugADR combinations were generated from all new
reports received during that time period. This data
was sent to a panel of experts for review, and the
summaries of the signals detected by the experts
were circulated to National Centres. The large volume of generated data made all the listed information impossible to review effectively, and there

394

was a lack of automation and follow-up within the
signalling system.
The large size of the data set (more than 2.5
million cases) makes individual case by case assessment impossible when entering cases into the
database, therefore clinical review of case series
has to be performed. As the volume of data received on a quarterly basis continued to increase it
was decided that a new approach to signal detection was needed.[3] In order to focus the clinical
analysis of case series on those drug-ADR combinations most likely to be signals, a quantitative approach could be used to filter out noise, and to
highlight potential signals.

Bate et al.

connections between drugs and adverse reactions
and is a very computationally efficient architecture
for considering all combinations. The network is
used to count all reports in the database: all occurrences of variable x (for example a drug), all occurrences of variable y (for example an ADR) and
all occurrences of x and y together. The method is
readily adapted to count occurrences of combinations of any pair of variables.
While the routine use of the method does not
strictly require a neural network, the neural network architecture properties are used fully when
performing unsupervised pattern recognition to
search for previously unknown higher order dependencies in the data set.[4]

2. Objectives
A new method was needed that would provide:
• Objective initial assessment of all drug-ADR
combinations
• Transparent selection of drug-ADR combinations for review
• A quantitative aid to signal assessment.
To meet these objectives a Bayesian neural network was developed for quantitative signal detection on the WHO database. The method is called a
Bayesian confidence propagation neural network
(BCPNN) and implements Bayesian statistics
within a neural network architecture.
3. Use of a Neural Network
The term ‘neural network’ is used to describe a
wide range of different computational architectures. These architectures are used for a diverse
range of tasks, including prediction, classification
of data sets, and data mining. Neural networks are
made up of many simple processors (‘units’),
where each unit has a small amount of local memory. Communication channels (‘connections’),
which carry numerical data, link the units to each
other, so that each unit only operates on local data
and on inputs received via connections from other
units.
In this application, a neural network is used to
search for dependencies in the data set. The network is routinely used to analyse the strength of
© Adis International Limited. All rights reserved.

4. Choice of Measure of
Disproportionality
The strength of dependency between a drug and
adverse reaction is defined by a logarithmic measure of disproportionality called the information
component (IC). This measure is defined as:
IC = log 2

p ( x , y)
p ( x ) p ( y)

where:
p (x) = probability of a specific drug ‘x’ being
listed on a case report;
p (y) = probability of a specific ADR ‘y’ being
listed on a case report;
p (x, y) = probability that a specific drug-ADR
combination ‘x’ and ’y’, is listed on a case report.
This equation can also be written as:
IC = log 2

p (y | x)
p ( y)

where:
p (y|x) = conditional probability of ‘y’ given ‘x’,
i.e. the probability of a specific ADR ‘y’ being
listed on a case report given the information that a
specific drug ‘x’ is listed as suspected on that case
report.
Thus the IC value is based on:
• the number of case reports with drug ‘x’; and
• the number of case reports with ADR ‘y’; and
Drug Safety 2002; 25 (6)

Data Mining Approach in Signal Detection and Analysis

• the number of reports with the specific combination of drug and ADR; and
• the total number of reports.
The IC measure can be seen as the calculation
of the logarithm of the ratio of observed rate of
reporting of a specific drug-adverse drug reaction
combination, to the expected rate, under the null
hypothesis of no association between drug and
ADR.
Thus when a drug-ADR combination is reported more often than expected relative to general
reporting of the drug, and general reporting of the
ADR, it results in positive values of the IC.
This IC measure is calculated within a Bayesian
framework; rather than the IC being a point estimate, the IC is a distribution that changes on addition of new data. It is assumed that a drug and an
ADR are independent in the absence of data of
either the drug or ADR. A ‘prior distribution’ is set
up based on this assumption. Therefore in the absence of data, the expectation value of the IC distribution E [IC] equals zero. The distribution
shrinks (the variance of the IC diminishes in magnitude), as data is received, and the expectation
value of the IC distribution either increases or decreases on addition of this data.
Bayesian statistics is used:
• To motivate the use of the information component as a measure of disproportionality useful
in highlighting unexpected dependencies: as
the IC is the logarithm of ratio of the posterior
and prior probabilities, it represents the change
in probability on addition of new data.
• To calculate the information component as a
distribution, rather than just a point estimate,
based on prior and posterior distributions.
• When the network is used for classification or
in pattern recognition, as the outputs in the neural network are posterior probabilities.
5. Use of Bayesian Method
A Bayesian statistical approach has been used
for a number of reasons:
• Ready applicability to low (and zero) counter
values.
© Adis International Limited. All rights reserved.

395

• Results can be calculated despite missing data,
by providing increased uncertainty in the results.
• Analysis of other variables and multi-variable
analyses can be performed.
• There is an intuitive relationship between the
point estimate of the IC and its confidence interval. These are merely two properties of the
IC distribution, where the point estimate of the
IC is calculated from the expectation value, and
the confidence interval is calculated from the
variance.
6. Use and Implementation of a
Bayesian Confidence Propagation
Neural Network
A Bayesian statistical approach is used to highlight unexpected dependencies in the data set;[5]
implementation in a neural network architecture
allows the routine calculation of the strength (or
weakness) of all drug-ADR dependencies in the
data set. The calculations performed routinely will
ultimately be extended to calculate dependencies
between all variables in the data set, although
currently such calculations are done on an ad hoc
basis.
These calculations result in an IC and confidence intervals for each IC (more accurately ‘probability intervals’), for each relationship in the network. As the IC is also the weight in the neural
network, the computational efficiency of the
method is further optimised.
This process is used to highlight drug-ADR
combinations most likely to be signals, and to look
for more complex patterns in the data. This quantitative signal detection methodology is now in
routine use for drug adverse reaction signal detection in the WHO database.
The method has been implemented into a new
systematic signalling process.[6] Every 3 months
the IC and its confidence interval are calculated for
all drug-ADR combinations. Combinations, where
the lower 95% confidence limit is newly greater
than zero, are highlighted for clinical review. If
considered signals after clinical assessment these
Drug Safety 2002; 25 (6)

396

are then communicated externally. Follow-up processes are also used to provide further information
on signals, or allow those potentially clinically interesting combinations to be signalled at a later
stage when sufficient data has accumulated.
The BCPNN approach is:
• transparent – easy to see what has been calculated
• robust – valid results can be produced despite
missing data
• producing reproducible results – making validation and checking easy
• time efficient – network only needs one pass
across data.
7. Evaluation of Method
Initial testing of the approach was done by examining whether the IC was positive for drug-ADR
combinations we would hope to signal, such as
captopril-coughing, while negative for drug-ADR
combinations we would hope not to highlight, such
as the combinations digoxin-rash, or digoxin-acne.
Captopril-coughing is a signal that would have
been highlighted much earlier using the BCPNN
method.[7] In contrast, neither digoxin-rash nor
digoxin-acne was highlighted with this method.[7]
Tests to determine whether we would have
found signals earlier with the new method were
made both against general reference sources
(Physicians’ Desk Reference and Martindale) and
extant literature reports in another sensitive international signalling system (database of the publication Reactions Weekly).
In the investigation against general reference
sources, a retrospective evaluation of 95 combinations highlighted by BCPNN, and 13 not highlighted by BCPNN from 1993 were made. In this
study the positive predictive value reached 44.2%
since 42 of the 95 combinations would have been
found with the BCPNN. The negative predictive
value was 84.6%, since only two of the 13 combinations not highlighted, were found to be signals.
For the purposes of the study signals were defined
as combinations unknown in 1993, but listed in the
© Adis International Limited. All rights reserved.

Bate et al.

literature 7 years later. Both of these studies are
described in detail in earlier publications.[6,8]
8. Detection of Group Effects
Beyond detecting specific drug–specific ADR
signals, the BCPNN method can also be used to
examine the relation between a group of similar
drugs and the same ADR.[9] Grouping of drugs can
be done for example using the WHO Anatomical
Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification.[10]
An investigation is performed to look at both:
• IC [drug-ADR]
• IC [(ATC group-drug)-ADR] and the two values compared.
The comparison group must be clinically valid
and selected objectively before the analysis is performed. The use of this method relies on the
amount of relevant data available and the proportion of cases of multiple suspected drugs on case
reports. The types of drugs investigated may also
effect the usefulness of the approach; for example
drugs with multiple drug indications (at potentially
different doses) may be particularly problematic.
Also differences in use of ADR terminology, such
as inter-country variation, will influence the results.
9. Conclusions
This quantitative method has been developed to
improve the usefulness of the WHO database of
spontaneously reported suspected drug-adverse reactions. The BCPNN method has been shown to be
of use in routine signal detection[8] and has also
been used in classification tasks, such as analysing
organophosphate poisoning cases, and quality in
pulp manufacturing process.
The usefulness of the output is influenced by the
quality of the data in the database, therefore this
method should be used to detect, rather than evaluate signals. The need for clinical analyses of case
series remains crucial.
Since there will always be some drug-ADR
combinations that can be considered clinically interesting and important, but that are not being reported unexpectedly frequently, other approaches
Drug Safety 2002; 25 (6)

Data Mining Approach in Signal Detection and Analysis

are also needed. The BCPNN is a tool developed
to enhance rather than replace traditional signal
detection procedures used on the WHO database
by: (i) initial highlighting of associations for clinical review; (ii) providing a tool for further analysis of potential signals; and (iii) seamless extension of the method for detection of complex
dependencies in the data set.
References
1. Edwards IR, Biriell C. Harmonisation in pharmacovigilance.
Drug Saf 1994; 10 (2): 93-102
2. Olsson S. The role of the WHO programme on international
drug monitoring in coordinating worldwide drug safety efforts. Drug Saf 1998; 19 (1): 1-10
3. Bate A, Orre R, Lindquist M, et al. Explanation of data mining
methods [online]. Available from URL: http://www.bmj.
com/cgi/content/full/322/7296/1207/DC1 [Accessed 2001
Oct 15]
4. Bate A, Orre R, Lindquist M, et al. Pattern recognition using a
recurrent neural network and its application to the WHO
database [abstract]. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2001; 10
(S1): S163

© Adis International Limited. All rights reserved.

397

5. Orre R, Lansner A, Bate A, et al. Bayesian neural networks with
confidence estimations applied to data mining. Computational Statistics Data Anal 2000; 34 (8): 473-93
6. Lindquist M, Edwards IR, Bate A, et al. From association to
alert: a revised approach to international signal analysis.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 1999; 8: S15-25
7. Bate A, Lindquist M, Edwards IR, et al. A Bayesian neural
network method for adverse drug reaction signal generation.
Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1998; 54: 315-21
8. Lindquist M, Stahl M, Bate A, et al. A retrospective evaluation
of a data mining approach to aid finding new adverse drug
reaction signals in the WHO international database. Drug Saf
2000; 23 (6): 533-42
9. Bate A, Lindquist M, Orre R, et al. Automated classification of
signals as group effects or drug specific on the WHO database
[abstract]. 8th Annual Meeting European Society of Pharmacovigilance; 2000 Sep; Verona; Elsevier, 2000
10. Guidelines for ATC classification and DDD assignment. 3rd
ed. Oslo: WHO Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics
Methodology, 2000

Correspondence and offprints: Andrew Bate, The Uppsala
Monitoring Centre, Stora Torget, Uppsala, S-75320, Sweden.
E-mail: andrew.bate@who-umc.org

Drug Safety 2002; 25 (6)

