Eur J Clin Pharmacol (2002) 58: 483–490
DOI 10.1007/s00228-002-0484-z

P H A R M A C O E PI D E M I O L O G Y A N D PR E S C R I P T I O N

A. Bate Æ M. Lindquist Æ R. Orre Æ I.R. Edwards
R.H.B. Meyboom

Data-mining analyses of pharmacovigilance signals in relation
to relevant comparison drugs
Received: 14 November 2001 / Accepted in revised form: 2 May 2002 / Published online: 3 September 2002
Ó Springer-Verlag 2002

Abstract Objective: The aim of this paper is to demonstrate the usefulness of the Bayesian Conﬁdence
Propagation Neural Network (BCPNN) in the detection
of drug-speciﬁc and drug-group eﬀects in the database
of adverse drug reactions of the World Health Organization Programme for International Drug Monitoring.
Methods: Examples of drug–adverse reaction combinations highlighted by the BCPNN as quantitative associations were selected. The anatomical therapeutic
chemical (ATC) group to which the drug belonged was
then identiﬁed, and the information component (IC) was
calculated for this ATC group and the adverse drug
reaction (ADR). The IC of the ATC group with the
ADR was then compared with the IC of the drug–ADR
by plotting the change in IC and its 95% conﬁdence
limit over time for both.
Results: The chosen examples show that the BCPNN
data-mining approach can identify drug-speciﬁc as well
as group eﬀects. In the known examples that served as
test cases, beta-blocking agents other than practolol are
not associated with sclerosing peritonitis, but all angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors are associated with
coughing, as are antihistamines with heart-rhythm disorders and antipsychotics with myocarditis. The recently
identiﬁed association between antipsychotics and myocarditis remains even after consideration of concomitant
medication.
A. Bate Æ M. Lindquist Æ I.R. Edwards (&) Æ R.H.B. Meyboom
The Uppsala Monitoring Centre,
WHO Collaborating Centre for
International Drug Monitoring, Stora Torget 3,
75320 Uppsala, Sweden
E-mail: ralph.edwards@who-umc.org
Tel.: +46-18-656060
Fax: +46-18-656080
A. Bate
Division of Clinical Pharmacology,
Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden
R. Orre
Department of Mathematical Statistics,
Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden

Conclusion: The BCPNN can be used to improve the
ability of a signal detection system to highlight group
and drug-speciﬁc eﬀects.
Keywords BCPNN Æ Automated signal detection Æ
Pharmacovigilance

Introduction
When deciding whether a drug side eﬀect is unacceptably frequent, the alternatives to a drug treatment need
to be considered, as well as the incidence of other adverse drug reactions (ADRs) and the beneﬁts of the drug
[1, 2]. The alternatives may be non-treatment, the prescribing of other drugs or other treatments. Spontaneous
databases can provide an important instantly accessible
source of information not only for the investigation of a
case series for a speciﬁc drug–ADR combination but
also to give an indication of whether there are signs that
similar drugs may cause the same ADR. Respective incidence rates can be estimated using other methods. This
paper illustrates an approach to initiate the relative
safety assessment of drugs using the data available in a
global spontaneous reporting system – the World Health
Organization (WHO) database. While accepting that
comparisons based on spontaneously reported data has
limitations [3, 4], some hypotheses can be formulated
from such analyses.
The Uppsala Monitoring Centre in Sweden was set
up to detect new drug–ADR signals globally. Spontaneously reported ADRs are sent to the WHO collaborating centre in Uppsala, Sweden, from more than 60
countries around the world [5].
The WHO database, containing more than 2.5 million case reports, is analysed regularly to ﬁnd new drug
safety signals, which are then communicated back to the
national centres for further analysis, possibly leading to
regulatory action [6]. Unlike pharmaceutical company
reporting databases, this database contains information
on all drug substances, rather than just those of a

484

particular company. This makes analyses between different drugs used in the same therapeutic class easy.
Large data sets make the analysis of all ADRs on
a case-by-case level impossible. Instead the beneﬁts of
a large volume of data can be utilised with data-mining
methods [7, 8, 9]. In previous work [10, 11] we have
described how the WHO Collaborating Centre for
International Drug Monitoring uses a methodology
referred to as the Bayesian Conﬁdence Propagation
Neural Network (BCPNN) to screen the WHO database
for quantitatively signiﬁcant combinations of drugs and
adverse eﬀects, highlighting associations for clinical
review.
The process of investigating potential drug-group
eﬀects should ideally be done for all signals where there
are comparators with similar therapeutic/chemical
properties, since rational therapeutic decisions between
drugs need to be made. For some therapeutic areas, such
as antipsychotics, the target drug will frequently be used
concomitantly with other drugs in that class, or shortly
before or afterwards. In order to consider the impact of
concomitant medication, best- and worst-case scenarios
can be constructed. In a ‘worst-case scenario’ the ADR
is attributed to the target drug, while in a ‘best-case
scenario’ alternative explanations are considered more
probable causes of the ADR.

Methods
BCPNN method
Quantitative signal detection in the WHO database of ADRs is
done using a BCPNN [9, 10, 11]. This approach, implementing
Bayesian statistics in a neural network architecture, calculates an
information component (IC) for each drug–ADR combination in
the database. The IC is a logarithmic measure of disproportionality; drug–ADR combinations with positive IC values represent
combinations reported unexpectedly frequently and negative values
unexpectedly infrequently. An IC value of 0 is obtained when
a drug–ADR combination is reported as frequently as would be
expected from general reporting of that drug and general reporting
of that ADR with all drugs in the database. Thus the entire
database is used as a background for comparison. Standard
deviations are calculated for each IC value.
This method is routinely used to scan all new reports received in
a 3-month period. Assessment of how this additional information
eﬀects the strength of dependency of individual drug–ADR combinations throughout the database is then done. When the IC minus two standard deviations (IC ) 2SD) newly becomes greater
than zero for a particular combination, it is highlighted for clinical
review.
As there is no ‘gold standard’ in signal detection, evaluation of
the performance of signal-detection methods is diﬃcult. However
in a retrospective study of the ability of the BCPNN to highlight
signals, the positive predictive value of harm, as recorded 7 years
later in standard literature, was 46% and the negative predictive
value 84.6% [12]. Thus the ability of this method to detect new
ADRs early has been demonstrated.
In routine calculations counts are based on combinations in
which drugs were speciﬁcally suspected of causing an ADR.
However studies have been performed utilising information about
drugs listed as concomitant medication. The results in this paper
refer to suspected drug–ADR combinations, unless otherwise
stated.

BCPNN data-mining on target drugs and comparator groups
Once a drug–ADR combination is highlighted quantitatively,
a further analysis of the reporting for the drug group in question
can then be carried out by considering the strength of relationship
between the group of drugs that the target drug belongs to and the
ADR of interest. Three possible scenarios are present: (a) IC (target
drug–ADR) greater than IC (drug group excluding target drug–
ADR) greater than 0; (b) IC (drug group excluding target drug–
ADR) greater than IC (target drug–ADR) greater than 0; (c) IC
(target drug–ADR) greater than 0 which is greater than the IC
(drug group excluding target drug–ADR). In order to examine the
eﬀectiveness of the approach, BCPNN data-mining runs were made
of known drug–ADR signals of the following speciﬁc examples:
Practolol–peritonitis
The associations of both practolol and selective beta-blocking
agents [anatomical therapeutic chemical (ATC) group C07AB]
versus sclerosing peritonitis were examined. In this example cases
of either ‘sclerosing peritonitis’ or ‘peritonitis’ were considered
cases of interest, as sclerosing peritonitis cases were initially coded
in the WHO database using the term ‘peritonitis’. For the rest of
this paper the combination of ‘sclerosing peritonitis’ and ‘peritonitis’ are referred to as ‘peritonitis’ cases. We expected the IC of the
group to be negative with peritonitis.
Captopril–coughing
The association of captopril versus coughing was examined and
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (ATC group
C09AA) versus coughing. We expected the IC for the group of the
ACE inhibitors to be positive and of approximately the same
magnitude as for captopril.
Terfenadine–heart rhythm disorders
The association of heart-rate and rhythm disorders (at WHOArt
ADR terminology system organ class level: 1030) with terfenadine
was examined and compared with that of the group of other antihistamines for systemic use (ATC group R06AX) versus heartrate and rhythm disorders (SOC 1030). This ADR was examined
on a system organ class level. The WHOArt terminology is divided
into system organ classes, a SOC is a group of several ADR terms
each pertaining to the same system–organ. We expected the IC to
be positive for the group with heart-rate rhythm disorders, but less
so than for terfenadine.
Clozapine–myocarditis
We examined the association of clozapine–myocarditis and that of
the group of antipsychotics (ATC group N05A) with myocarditis.
In this study either cardiomyopathy or myocarditis were considered
‘myocarditis’ cases, as myocarditis may sometimes be reported as
cardiomyopathy. We expected the IC for the group to be negative
with myocarditis.
For each example the target drug–ADR combination was selected using WHOArt and WHO Drug Dictionary classiﬁcation.
Then a group of similar drugs to the target drug were deﬁned using
the WHO ATC classiﬁcation as a reference [13]. The hierarchical
structure of WHOArt was, when needed, used to group clinically
related ADR terms.
The IC against the background of the whole database, was
calculated for: the selected drug substance versus ADR and the
ATC group of the target drug (excluding target drug) versus the
same speciﬁed adverse reaction term.
A single positive case was counted, when at least one of the
drugs in the speciﬁed ATC group (excluding the target drug) was
listed as suspected of causing the ADR of interest. When two or
more of the group were co-suspected, the case was counted once.

485
For each experiment the change in IC (and its standard deviation) at quarterly intervals for a target drug–ADR and the change
in IC for the group–ADR were both calculated. On each ﬁgure the
two values of IC (each ± 2SDs) are superimposed and plotted over
time. All ﬁgures show the change in IC plotted cumulatively.
Analysis of role of concomitant medication
in group/drug-speciﬁc eﬀect
In order to analyse whether myocarditis reported as associated with
clozapine might in fact also be an antipsychotic group eﬀect [14],
we initially compared clozapine–myocarditis and the group of antipsychotics–myocarditis. However the WHO reporting form allows for coding of more than one suspected drug, and as
antipsychotic drugs are often used with other drugs concurrently
[15] we could expect considerable numbers of reports when several
drugs were suspected of causing myocarditis or cardiomyopathy.
Therefore the methodology was adapted to determine best- and
worst-case scenarios.
A ‘Best/worst-case’ scenario was set up to reduce the possibility
of an apparent association between the group of antipsychotics and
myocarditis being due to other drugs co-suspected on the same case
reports. Many of these co-suspected drugs might be considered
more likely to have caused myocarditis on such case reports.
For the ‘worst-case’ scenario it was assumed that when one (or
more) antipsychotic was suspected of causing cardiomyopathy or
myocarditis, the antipsychotic drug did in fact cause the side eﬀect,
irrespective of co-medication used. For the ‘best-case’ scenario any
case in which an antipsychotic was suspected, but a ‘probable cardiomyopathy/myocarditis causer’ was co-suspected, the reaction
was considered not to be related to the antipsychotic drug. A
‘probable cardiomyopathy/myocarditis causer’ was deﬁned for the
purposes of this study as any drug substance that had been suspected
of causing cardiomyopathy or myocarditis on ﬁve or more case reports in the WHO database, irrespective of all other information on
those case reports such as other co-suspected drugs (Table 1).

Results
On the graphs results from the diﬀerent studies are
plotted, the red plots represent the speciﬁc drug–ADR
combination, and the green plots represent the rest of
the ATC group with the ADR(s). Graphs are plotted
from the ﬁrst quarter that either: the drug–ADR combination of interest was ﬁrst reported or when one of the
drugs in the comparison group was ﬁrst reported with
the ADR (Table 2).
Practolol–peritonitis
The results (Fig. 1) show a positive IC –2SD for
practolol–peritonitis, whereas the IC is negative for the
Table 1. A ‘best-case/worst-case’ scenario was used to analyse the
observed clozapine – myocarditis and antipsychotic – myocarditis
associations further. A ‘probable cardiomyopathy/myocarditis
causer’ was deﬁned in this study as any drug reported more than or

group of all other selective beta-blocking agents.
Practolol was withdrawn in 1976 in the UK [16], due to
reporting of the occulo-mucocutaneous syndrome,
which included sclerosing peritonitis. (It was never
launched in the US.) For this example the IC values
were congruent with the contention that the eﬀect is
speciﬁc to practolol.
Captopril–coughing
The captopril example shows that the association captopril–coughing is strongly highlighted, but there is
considerable reporting of other ACE inhibitors with
coughing, as the positive IC (and IC –2SD) indicates
(Fig. 2). Strong associations of several individual ACE
inhibitors with coughing, such as enalapril (Table 3),
lead to a positive IC for the whole group with coughing.
ACE inhibitors are known to be generally associated
with cough, indeed there is still much debate as to how
incidence rates of the ACE inhibitors with cough compare [17].
Terfenadine–heart-rate and rhythm disorders
Both terfenadine and the group of antihistamines have
positive IC values with heart-rate and rhythm disorders
(Fig. 3). Terfenadine was withdrawn in some countries
in 1997 due to reporting of arrhythmias. However there
have been ongoing discussions as to whether other drugs
in the group might have similar eﬀects. Astemizole has
been withdrawn due to such concerns. This example
shows that heart-rate rhythm disorders may also aﬀect
other members of the group of non-sedating antihistamines [18]. A previous study combining spontaneous
data with sales data came to a similar conclusion [19].
Clozapine–myocarditis
Recently the association between clozapine and myocarditis has been reported [20]. The clozapine results illustrate the association between clozapine and
myocarditis (Fig. 4). In a comparison of the other antipsychotics, there are some signs that other drugs may
also be related. The removal of known causes of myocarditis however immediately weakens the association
equal to ﬁve times of causing cardiomyopathy or myocarditis, i.e.
no clinical assessment was made. The following principles were
used

Clozapine

Antipsychotics excluding clozapine

Worst-case scenario

All suspected clozapine cases

Best-case scenario

All suspected clozapine cases excluding those where:
(a) another antipsychotic drug or (b) a ‘probable
cardiomyopathy/myocarditis causer’ drug was
listed (irrespective of suspicion of involvement)

All cases where at least one antipsychotic drug other
than clozapine was suspected
All suspected antipsychotic cases excluding those
where: (a) clozapine or (b) a ‘probable
cardiomyopathy/myocarditis causer’ drug was
listed (irrespective of suspicion of involvement)

486
Table 2. This table shows the key statistics for each example. Each example number corresponds to a ﬁgure. ADR adverse drug reaction,
IC information component, ACE angiotensin-converting enzymes

Key
statistics
Drug
ADR
Group

Example 1

Example 2

Example 3

Example 4

(IC [target drug-ADR])
>0>(IC [drug group
excluding target
drug-ADR])
Practolol
Peritonitis

(IC [drug group
excluding target
drug-ADR]) >( IC
[target drug-ADR]) >0
Captopril
Coughing

(IC [target drug-ADR])
>(IC [drug group excluding
target drug-ADR]) >0

(IC [target drug-ADR])
>(IC [drug group excluding
target drug-ADR]) >0
Clozapine
Myocarditis

Beta-blocking agents,
selective

ACE inhibitors, plain

Terfenadine
Heart-rate and rhythm
disorders
Other antihistamines
for systemic use

Antipsychotics

Table 3. The information component (IC) and IC –2 standard
deviations (SD) values of all angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors reported once or more of causing coughing in the third
quarter of 1999. The total number of cases of the drug being suspected of causing coughing is also shown (Ncomb total). The table
is sorted based on IC value
Drug name

IC

IC –2SD

Ncomb total

Enalapril
Cilazapril
Ramipril
Lisinopril
Perindopril
Trandolapril
Captopril
Quinapril
Fosinopril

4.48
4.27
4.23
4.18
4.04
4.02
3.82
3.80
3.42

4.43
4.01
4.12
4.11
3.82
3.73
3.76
3.63
3.18

5298
162
965
2116
217
116
2760
330
170

Fig. 1. Practolol, anatomic therapeutic chemical (ATC) group
C07AB – peritonitis. This graph shows the change in information
component (IC) over time of practolol with peritonitis until the end
of the third quarter of 1999. The IC is plotted on the y axis and
time (in quarters) on the x axis. On the same graph the ATC group
C07AB beta-blocking agents selective (excluding practolol) with
peritonitis is plotted. All data plotted are cumulative

Fig. 2. Captopril, anatomic therapeutic chemical (ATC) group
C09AA – coughing. This graph shows the change in information
component (IC) over time of captopril with coughing until the end
of the third quarter of 1999. The IC is plotted on the y axis and
time (in quarters) on the x axis. On the same graph the ATC group
C09AA angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (excluding captopril) with coughing is plotted. All data plotted are
cumulative

Fig. 3. Terfenadine, anatomic therapeutic chemical (ATC) group
R06AX – heart-rate and rhythm disorders. This graph shows the
change in information component (IC) over time of terfenadine
with heart-rate and rhythm disorders until the end of the third
quarter of 1999. The IC is plotted on the y axis and time (in
quarters) on the x axis. On the same graph the ATC group R06AX
(excluding terfenadine), other antihistamines for systemic use with
heart-rate and rhythm disorders is plotted. All data plotted are
cumulative

for the rest of the group, showing the importance of
careful consideration of the comparison group. The association is further weakened after consideration of
concomitant medication on the cases (Fig. 5). However

487

be listed erroneously on an ADR report as a sole suspected drug and the other as an innocent bystander.
Most cases of clozapine were reported before the recent
publicity, so this will not aﬀect the results presented
here, but rather ongoing antipsychotic monitoring.

Discussion and conclusions

Fig. 4. Clozapine, anatomic therapeutic chemical (ATC) group
N05A – myocarditis. This graph shows the change in IC over time
of clozapine with myocarditis until the end of the second quarter of
2000. The IC is plotted on the y axis and time (in quarters) on the
x axis. On the same graph the ATC group N05A antipsychotics
(excluding clozapine) with myocarditis is plotted. All data plotted
are cumulative

Fig. 5. Information component (IC) and IC±2 standard deviations (SD) for best-case and worst-case scenarios for both clozapine
and antipsychotics with myocarditis, calculated on all data received
until the end of the second quarter of 2000

analysis of the case series suggested that there may be
one or more other drugs related to myocarditis. A signal
has been published on this [14].
The worst-case scenario could have been made even
harsher by considering cases of myocarditis in which the
drug(s) of interest were concomitantly reported as
causally related. However this was not done as we did
not wish to contradict the views of the reporters who will
often have more data available than that in the WHO
database. However if other antipsychotics do in fact also
cause myocarditis, and as clozapine is now known to
cause myocarditis, then when both clozapine and another antipsychotic are both prescribed to a patient and
myocarditis observed, then it is likely that clozapine will

When a signal is discovered for a particular drug, the
question needs to be addressed as to whether this is
likely to be a unique problem or further evidence towards a group eﬀect. Such a group eﬀect may be previously known, or this new signal may be the ﬁrst of
many which lead to the identiﬁcation of a group eﬀect.
As described in previous papers this BCPNN approach aims to highlight drug–ADR combinations that
are unexpectedly frequently reported together as compared with the numbers expected from the background
of the database. This paper extends this to consider
group eﬀects. Routinely any drug–ADR combination
that has IC –2SD greater than 0 is highlighted for clinical review. The IC of an appropriate group with this
same ADR should then be considered. When for a group
the IC –2SD value has become positive, this implies that
either there are one or two drugs in the group strongly
associated with the ADR or that this is a group-eﬀect
signal.
When the IC (and IC –2SD) are much more positive
for the target drug substance than for the ATC group
excluding this drug substance, this implies that this is
likely to be a drug substance-speciﬁc problem. When the
IC (and IC –2SD) are similar for the drug substance and
the ATC group excluding this drug substance, or more
positive for the ATC group than for the speciﬁed drug
substance, this implies that this is likely to be a problem
for one or more of the drug substances in the selected
group.
Analysis of spontaneous reports alone cannot be used
to demonstrate causality between a drug and an ADR,
however it has been shown to be a quick and relatively
cheap approach to early detection of drug–ADR signals
[21]. Signals can then be followed up using other methods such as pharmacoepidemiological studies. This paper demonstrates a methodology based on
spontaneously reported data to provide an indication of
whether a signal is probably unique to the target drug or
an indication that it is a group eﬀect. Such consideration
will help in the promotion of the need for eﬀectiveness
/risk analysis when considering signals and facilitate the
setting up of further studies.
The limitations of spontaneous reporting are well
documented and must be considered when assessing the
implications of quantitative statistical method based
results based on such data. However in this method we
are comparing a drug and group of drugs from the
same therapeutic group to the same ADR. Although it
is generally reasonable to assume that at least underreporting will not vary hugely [4, 22], reporting bias

488

due to alerts or media inﬂuence must be taken into
consideration if drugs are launched on the market at
diﬀerent times. This will have little aﬀect on IC values
if the ADR is unknown at the time for the drugs under
investigation.
Quantitative associations highlighted from spontaneous reports may provide misleading results, so all such
associations require further investigation. Both ACE
inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists appear associated with coughing in the WHO database. However,
a study has shown that the association between angiotensin II antagonists and coughing can be explained by
a channelling eﬀect [23]. Thus our results do not necessarily imply that captopril is less causative of cough than
other ACE inhibitors in general. Such examples make
clear the danger of presuming incidence rates and
populations at risk from spontaneous data: analysis of
spontaneous databases shows diﬀerences in reporting,
not diﬀerences in incidence rates. Combination with
sales data [24, 25] and prescription monitoring [26, 27]
can add greatly to the value of such analyses without the
high costs and delays involved in formal epidemiological
studies.
Sales ﬁgures can easily be obtained and used when
comparing two speciﬁc drugs to each other or a drug to a
group. However, to have sales ﬁgures on all drugs
globally, which would be essential for this quantitative
data-mining approach where we consider all drug–ADRs
in the database, is clearly impractical, and methods
based solely on spontaneous data are a necessity.
When a comparison group is selected to compare
with a speciﬁc drug, this can either be done objectively,
by selecting the ATC group which the drug belongs to,
or subjectively by considering drugs one by one on, for
example, clinical criteria. The result will be inﬂuenced by
the selection of inclusion of the comparison group.
If the choice of comparison group is subjective, the
criteria used to make the selection will vary, both between individuals and even for a single person over time,
as personal opinion and prevailing medical knowledge
change. Thus although a comparison group can be selected optimally for an individual study this will be one
person’s perspective and will be at a single instant in
time.
If the comparison group is selected objectively, for
example all drugs within a speciﬁed ATC group are included in the analysis without consideration on a drugspeciﬁc level, there may be drugs included or excluded
inappropriately from the group.
When the drug of interest, or one or more of the
potential comparison drugs, is used for more than one
indication, objective selection of a comparison group
becomes diﬃcult. For example in a study of ophthalmic
drugs, to include timolol, an anti-glaucoma preparation,
in a comparison group for latanoprost would be to ignore its use as a beta-blocking agent, which might result
in a diﬀering ADR proﬁle. But exclusion of all timolol
cases would exclude many bona ﬁde cases of ophthalmic
medication and result in the exclusion of valuable

information. Similarly the choice of which ADR term or
level of ADR term or even combination of ADR terms
may also eﬀect the result of the analysis.
In this paper an objective method of choice of
comparison group is proposed, the drawback of which
is that it might reduce the appropriateness of comparison group, but it allows large numbers of comparisons to be made automatically. Limitations of the
choice of comparison group need to be considered at
the clinical review stage. Alternative groupings of
drugs, such as chemical structural similarity alone,
could also be used.
In this paper we describe comparisons with groups of
drugs based on ATC group classiﬁcation. For further
automation and routine scanning it is important to have
a standard comparison. However in special cases we are
able to create speciﬁc comparison groups, for example
only considering half the drugs from a speciﬁc ATC
group depending on the speciﬁc issue we are addressing.
As demonstrated by the clozapine example we are also
able to exclude case reports fulﬁlling certain criteria
from the runs, such as other known causes of the particular side eﬀect we are interested in. This inherent
ﬂexibility within the system adds greatly to its usefulness.
When a group has a positive IC this may indeed be
due to a group eﬀect or due to one speciﬁc drug in the
comparator group being particularly strongly associated
to the ADR of interest. The need for investigation of the
individual drugs in the group with this ADR is clear.
The diﬃculty of many co-suspected drugs can to
a certain extent be controlled for using the ‘worst-case
/best-case’ technique used here for the clozapine example as has also been done for example to remove nondiabetic patients from a background [28]. As long as
such measures are made transparently and decided in
advance, such revisions should not be considered data
dredging.
The beneﬁts of a signal-detection approach unbiased
by observer are clear and have been described elsewhere
[6, 11, 29]. However such an objective quantitative signal-detection scheme necessarily has the possibility of
highlighting false-positive and false-negative signals,
particularly as an arbitrary threshold is used. However if
an association is found for a group of similar drugs, this
will encourage further consideration of all the drugs in
this group, some or all of which might individually not
have been highlighted for review.
On a quarterly level we currently calculate the IC for
each reported drug–ADR combination. We intend to
routinely calculate the IC values for all drug groups at
a speciﬁed level of ATC, thus providing an immediate
comparison for drug–ADRs to their respective therapeutic groups with the same ADR. Therefore on ﬁnding
a new drug–ADR association, one will be able to quickly
determine whether there is evidence in the WHO
database that other related drugs might have a similar
adverse reaction. As demonstrated here with the
terfenadine example, by looking at diﬀerent levels of

489

ADR term and groups of drugs, we can generalise this as
necessary to compare groups of drugs at the level of
speciﬁcity of ADR term that we are interested in,
whether preferred term, high-level term or system organ
class.
In the future we intend to test this on larger numbers
of examples to further determine the reliability of this
method in the early detection of group eﬀects. Further
work is also being done to reﬁne the process by which we
determine the most appropriate comparison group for a
given drug.
Acknowledgements We wish to thank the national centres for their
generous support of the programme and the data, but wish to
emphasise that the conclusions are not necessarily those of the
national centres themselves nor of the WHO.

Glossary
Information Component (IC)
log2 (Posterior Probability / Prior Probability)
IC SD

The standard deviation of the IC
Bayesian Statistics
A method of statistical inference in which probabilities reﬂect degrees of belief, which are reﬁned on addition of new data
Prior probability
Probability of a speciﬁc ADR being reported on
a case report
Posterior probability
Probability of a speciﬁc ADR being reported on
a case report given that a speciﬁc drug is suspected
Neural network
A computer architecture in which a number of
processors are interconnected in a manner suggestive
of the connections between neurons in a human brain.
(See Encyclopaedia Britannica Online at http:
//search.eb.com/cgi-bin/dictionary?va=neural+network
[Accessed 14 March 2002]) Note: Such programming
allows eﬀective calculation of potentially vast numbers
of combinations by performing large numbers of
simple calculations in parallel. Neural networks are
often used in classiﬁcation and pattern recognition
tasks where the dependencies in the data set are
commonly unknown.

References
1. Edwards IR, Hugman B (1997) The challenge of eﬀectively
communicating risk-beneﬁt information. Drug Saf 17:216–227
2. Edwards IR, Wiholm B-E, Martinez C (1996) Concepts in riskbeneﬁt assessment. Drug Saf 15:1–7

3. Lindquist M, Edwards IR (1993) Adverse drug reaction reporting in Europe: some problems of comparison. Int J Risk
Saf Med 4:35–46
4. Tubert-Bitter P, Begaud B, Moride Y, et al (1996) Comparing
the toxicity of two drugs in the framework of spontaneous
reporting: a conﬁdence interval approach. J Clin Epidemiol
49:121–123
5. Olsson S (1998) The role of the WHO programme on international drug monitoring in coordinating worldwide drug
safety eﬀorts. Drug Saf 19:1–10
6. Lindquist M, Edwards IR, Bate A, Fucik H, Nunes A-M, Ståhl
M (1999) From association to alert – a revised approach to
international signal analysis. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf
8:S15–S25
7. Hand DJ (1999) Statistics and data mining: intersecting disciplines. (SIGKDD) Explorations 1:16–19
8. Edwards IR (1997) Adverse drug reactions: ﬁnding the needle
in the haystack (editorial). BMJ 315:500
9. Bate A, Orre R, Lindquist M, Edwards IR (2001) Explanation
of data mining methods. BMJ website 2001 http:
//www.bmj.com/cgi/content/full/322/7296/1207/DC1.html
10. Orre R, Lansner A, Bate A, Lindquist M (2000) Bayesian
Neural Networks with conﬁdence estimations applied to data
mining. Comp Stat Data Anal 34:473–493
11. Bate A, Lindquist M, Edwards IR, et al (1998) A Bayesian
neural network method for adverse drug reaction signal generation. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 54:315–321
12. Lindquist M, Ståhl M, Bate A, Edwards IR, Meyboom RHB
(2000) A retrospective evaluation of a data mining approach to
aid ﬁnding new adverse drug reaction signals in the WHO international database. Drug Saf 23:533–542
13. Anonymous (2001) Guidelines for ATC classiﬁcation and
DDD assignment, 4th edn. WHO Collaborating Centre for
Drug Statistics Methodology, Oslo
14. Coulter DM, Bate A, Meyboom RH, et al (2001) Antipsychotic
drugs and heart muscle disorder in international pharmacovigilance: data mining study. BMJ 322:1207–1209
15. Fourrier A, Gasquet I, Allicar MP, et al (2000) Patterns of
neuroleptic drug prescription: a national cross-sectional survey
of a random sample of French psychiatrists. Br J Clin Pharmacol 49:80–86
16. Venning GR (1983) Identiﬁcation of adverse reactions to new
drugs II. How were 18 important adverse reactions discovered
and with what delay? BMJ 286:289–292
17. Overlack A (1996) ACE inhibitor-induced cough and bronchospasm. Incidence, mechanisms and management. Drug Saf
15:72–78
18. Crumb WJ (2000) Loratadine blockade of K(+) channels in
human heart: comparison with terfenadine under physiological
conditions. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 292:261–264
19. Lindquist M, Edwards IR (1997) Risks of non-sedating
antihistamines. Lancet 349:1322
20. Killian JG, Kerr K, Lawrence C, Celermajer DS (1999)
Myocarditis and cardiomyopathy associated with clozapine.
Lancet 354:1841–1845
21. Rawlins MD (1988) Spontaneous reporting of adverse drug
reactions. II: Uses. Br J Clin Pharmacol 26:7–11
22. Pierﬁtte C, Begaud B, Lagnaoui R (1999) Is reporting rate
a good predictor of risks associated with drugs? Br J Clin
Pharmacol 47:329–331
23. Mackay FJ, Pearce GL, Mann RD (1999) Cough and angiotensin II receptor antagonists: cause or confounding? Br J Clin
Pharmacol 47:111–114
24. Edwards IR, Fletcher AP, Lindquist M, Pettersson M,
Sanderson GH, Schou JS (1997) The ADR signal analysis
(ASAP) – ﬁnal report. EU funded technical report
25. Lindquist M, Pettersson M, Edwards IR, et al (1997) How does
cystitis aﬀect a comparative risk proﬁle of tiaprofenic acid with
other non-steroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs? An international
study based on spontaneous reports and drug usage data.
Pharmacol Toxicol 80:211–217

490
26. Mackay FJ (1998) Post-marketing studies: the work of the drug
safety research unit. Drug Saf 19:343–353
27. Coulter DM (2000) The New Zealand intensives medicines
monitoring progamme in proactive safety surveillance. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 9:273–280
28. Moore N, Kreft-Jais C, Haramburu F, et al (1997) Reports of
hypoglycaemia associated with the use of ACE inhibitors and

other drugs: a case/non-case study in the French pharmacovigilance system database. Br J Clin Pharmacol 44:513–518
29. DuMouchel W (1999) Bayesian data mining in large frequency
tables, with an application to the FDA spontaneous reporting
system. Am Stat 53:177–190

