ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 24 May 2018
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00541

Mining Patients’ Narratives in Social
Media for Pharmacovigilance:
Adverse Effects and Misuse of
Methylphenidate
Edited by:
Iñaki Gutiérrez-Ibarluzea,
Basque Office for Health Technology
Assessment (OSTEBA), Spain
Reviewed by:
Bryan Martin Bennett,
Adelphi (United Kingdom),
United Kingdom
Ana Paula Martins,
Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
*Correspondence:
Xiaoyi Chen
xiaoyi.chen@inserm.fr
Carole Faviez
carole.faviez@kapcode.fr
† These

authors have contributed
equally to this work.

Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Pharmaceutical Medicine and
Outcomes Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Pharmacology
Received: 15 December 2017
Accepted: 04 May 2018
Published: 24 May 2018
Citation:
Chen X, Faviez C, Schuck S,
Lillo-Le-Louët A, Texier N,
Dahamna B, Huot C, Foulquié P,
Pereira S, Leroux V, Karapetiantz P,
Guenegou-Arnoux A, Katsahian S,
Bousquet C and Burgun A (2018)
Mining Patients’ Narratives in Social
Media for Pharmacovigilance: Adverse
Effects and Misuse of
Methylphenidate.
Front. Pharmacol. 9:541.
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00541

Xiaoyi Chen 1*† , Carole Faviez 2*† , Stéphane Schuck 2 , Agnès Lillo-Le-Louët 3 ,
Nathalie Texier 2 , Badisse Dahamna 4,5 , Charles Huot 6 , Pierre Foulquié 2 , Suzanne Pereira 7 ,
Vincent Leroux 8 , Pierre Karapetiantz 1 , Armelle Guenegou-Arnoux 1 , Sandrine Katsahian 1,9 ,
Cédric Bousquet 10 and Anita Burgun 1,9
1

UMRS 1138, équipe 22, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers,
Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 2 Kappa Santé, Paris, France, 3 Centre Régional de Pharmacovigilance, Hôpital
Européen Georges-Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris, France, 4 Service d’Informatique Biomédicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
de Rouen, Rouen, France, 5 Laboratoire d’Informatique, du Traitement de l’Information et des Systèmes-TIBS EA 4108,
Rouen, France, 6 Expert System, Paris, France, 7 Vidal, Issy Les Moulineaux, France, 8 Institut de Santé Urbaine,
Saint-Maurice, France, 9 Département d’Informatique Médicale, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France,
10
Sorbonne Université, Inserm, université Paris 13, Laboratoire d’informatique médicale et d’ingénierie des connaissances en
e-santé, LIMICS, Paris, France

Background: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the United States and the
European Medicines Agency (EMA) have recognized social media as a new data source
to strengthen their activities regarding drug safety.
Objective: Our objective in the ADR-PRISM project was to provide text mining and
visualization tools to explore a corpus of posts extracted from social media. We evaluated
this approach on a corpus of 21 million posts from five patient forums, and conducted a
qualitative analysis of the data available on methylphenidate in this corpus.
Methods: We applied text mining methods based on named entity recognition and
relation extraction in the corpus, followed by signal detection using proportional reporting
ratio (PRR). We also used topic modeling based on the Correlated Topic Model to obtain
the list of the matics in the corpus and classify the messages based on their topics.
Results: We automatically identified 3443 posts about methylphenidate published
between 2007 and 2016, among which 61 adverse drug reactions (ADR) were
automatically detected. Two pharmacovigilance experts evaluated manually the quality
of automatic identification, and a f-measure of 0.57 was reached. Patient’s reports were
mainly neuro-psychiatric effects. Applying PRR, 67% of the ADRs were signals, including
most of the neuro-psychiatric symptoms but also palpitations. Topic modeling showed
that the most represented topics were related to Childhood and Treatment initiation,
but also Side effects. Cases of misuse were also identified in this corpus, including
recreational use and abuse.

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

1

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

Conclusion: Named entity recognition combined with signal detection and topic
modeling have demonstrated their complementarity in mining social media data. An
in-depth analysis focused on methylphenidate showed that this approach was able
to detect potential signals and to provide better understanding of patients’ behaviors
regarding drugs, including misuse.
Keywords: pharmacovigilance, social media, methylphenidate, drug-related side effects and adverse reactions,
drug misuse, data mining, natural language processing

INTRODUCTION

approach still requires enhancements to support data mining in
pharmacovigilance, particularly in making the data generated by
patients more prominent, explicit, and accessible to experts in
pharmacovigilance. Moreover, data mining should not be limited
to ADR detection but rather integrate all kinds of information
reported in posts, like patients’ attitudes toward the treatment,
compliance, and misusage.
The main objectives of the ADR-PRISM project (Bousquet
et al., 2017) were to perform text mining and visualization tools
to enhance our understanding of patient reported information
in social media and to assess how it could be used for
pharmacovigilance purpose. In the context of ADR-PRISM, we
conducted an in-depth content analysis of the anonymized
data publicly available on methylphenidate on five open French
patient forums. This study is used in this article to present the
methods that we developed to mine social media and to illustrate
their results. The research done in the framework of ADRPRISM has been supported by an Ethics Advisor Board. The
Ethics Advisory Board was composed of scientists with different
scientific backgrounds: Gaby Danan from Pharmacovigilance
Consultancy; Alain-Jacques Valleron from INSERM UMR1169
and Paul-Olivier Gibert from Digital&Ethics, and provided
independent advice on the project.

Patients use social media to seek information, to receive advice
and support from other Internet users in order to better manage
their own health care and improve their quality of life (Lamas
et al., 2016). Patients and their family share information about
drugs in social media; they report on the outcomes and the
impact of the drugs on their health and day-life; they describe
their attitudes toward the drugs, including adherence to the
treatment, adverse events and sentiment (Laranjo et al., 2015).
Consequently, social media data mining has been recognized
by drug agencies as a potential approach to identify patient
reporting of adverse drug reactions (ADR), and to analyze
the attitudes and knowledge of general public and patients on
medicines. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)1 in the
United States and the European Medicines Agency (EMA)2 are
considering social media as a new data source to strengthen their
surveillance activities. Several authors have compared traditional
data sources and social media. They demonstrated similarities
between these sources to detect signals about adverse reactions
but suggested that social media sources contained different
information (such as less serious events and more adverse effects
related to their quality of life) and were used by patients. As
healthcare professionals mainly report to drug agencies, social
media may be a complementary source about drug use and safety.
This conclusion was shared by, e.g., Duh et al. who analyzed posts
related to atorvastatin, a lipid-lowering agent and sibutramine, an
appetite suppressan drug (Duh et al., 2016), and by Pages et al.
who focused on oral antineoplastic drugs (Pages et al., 2014).
However, we still lack a deep understanding of the characteristics
of patient reported information about ADRs and patient attitudes
regarding drug therapies, which hinders clear guidance on how
to adapt text mining tools for social media and how to use them
for decision in public health and drug safety (Golder et al., 2015).
Dedicated tools may help experts to extract relevant information
from the data available in different sources without spending
time to explore manually the data (Lardon et al., 2015; Nikfarjam
et al., 2015; Sloane et al., 2015). Nevertheless, Sarker et al. showed
that the most popular algorithms in the published studies were
supervised classification techniques to detect posts containing
ADR mentions, and lexicon-based approaches to extract named
entities from texts (Sarker et al., 2015). We believe that such

BACKGROUND
Pharmacovigilance
Drug safety, also referred as pharmacovigilance, focuses
primarily on ADRs, which are defined as “a response to a
drug which is noxious and unintended3 .” It also encompasses
medication errors, misuse, overdose and abuse (World Health
Organization, 1972). The spontaneous reporting system is
widely used and effective for pharmacovigilance, and its major
limitation is under-reporting. Hazell and Shakir estimated a
median under-reporting rate based on 37 published studies
as high as 94% (interquartile range 82–98%) (Hazell and
Shakir, 2006). Reasons that could explain under-reporting are
numerous: (i) frequent minor events like headache are less likely
to be reported by health professionals; (ii) health professionals
may not find it necessary to report the events that are very
frequent thus expected (iii) even when the symptoms are severe,
they may not be recognized as a possible ADR; for example,
Hazell and Shakir found the median under-reporting rate for
serious or severe ADRs was still very high (95%).

1 https://www.fda.gov/ScienceResearch/SpecialTopics/RegulatoryScience/

ucm452304.htm
2 http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/regulation/general/
general_content_000258.jsp

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

3 http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/en/d/Js4893e/

2

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

were prescribed methylphenidate reported being non-adherent
to their treatment (Kosse et al., 2017).
Concerns have been expressed about possible cardiac effects
of methylphenidate, regarding its pharmacological characteristics
and the first post-marketing data (Awudu and Besag, 2014).
Increase in mean heart rate and blood pressure have been
reported, although most of the studies have not yielded
statistically significant results (Cooper et al., 2011). Decreased
appetite and sleeping disorders have been reported (Kosse et al.,
2017).
Furthermore, concerns about off-label use and abuse of
methylphenidate have been expressed by drug surveillance
agencies. In 2009, the EMA requested for further studies
regarding the use of methylphenidate in Europe; in a report
published in 20135 , the French Agency (ANSM) described the
use of methylphenidate by non-ADHD patients, based on the
data collected by the national health insurance on one hand,
and by the French network for Pharmacodependence on the
other hand6 . Methylphenidate was prescribed to treat sleeping
disorders, anxio-depressive disorders, agitation, and was also
used for cocaine substitution, weight loss and doping (Kosse
et al., 2017). The non-medical use of prescription stimulants
like methylphenidate has become the subject of great interest
for its diffusion among university students. This phenomenon
has been widely investigated in the U.S. due to its increasing
trend (Weyandt et al., 2016). Recent research reported the
prevalence rate of stimulant misuse was estimated to range
between 13 and 23%, approximating around 17% on average
(Benson et al., 2015). In similar studies conducted in Europe
(Dietz et al., 2013; Deline et al., 2014), findings generally reflect
those from the United States. As a recent example, 11.3%
of university students in a Northern Italian geographic area
reported non-medical use of prescription stimulants (Majori
et al., 2017). Studies consistently indicate that the main reasons
to use them is cognitive and academic enhancement (Benson
et al., 2015; Weyandt et al., 2016), and—to a lower extent—
sports performance (Majori et al., 2017). Moreover, route of
administration affects the potential effects of methylphenidate.
When methylphenidate is abused intra-nasally, the effects are
similar to intranasal use of amphetamines and cocaine. Exposure
to excessive doses of methylphenidate could increase the risk of
serious adverse cardiovascular and psychiatric effects.
Key points regarding drug safety for methylphenidate can be
summarized as follows: (i) it is an important treatment option
for ADHD patients, with an increasing number of patients being
prescribed this medication, especially children or young adults;
(ii) there are concerns about adverse effects of methylphenidate
in patients that use it regularly to treat ADHD, with a particular
concern about long-term use; (iii) it has potential for misuse and
abuse. Detecting adverse events, misuse and abuse is a difficult

Under-reporting of ADRs by patients in spontaneous
reporting systems like the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System
(FAERS) has also been observed, with only 20–33% of the
minimum number of expected serious events being reported
(Alatawi and Hansen, 2017). Consequently, several authors have
reached to the conclusion that social media listening is an
important tool to augment post-marketing safety surveillance
(Powell et al., 2016; Koutkias et al., 2017). However, these
authors consider that much work is needed to determine the best
methods for using this data source. Besides ADRs, the messages
in social media can be used to explore other behaviors related
to pharmaceutical treatment, like non-compliance, misuse,
overdose, and abuse that have to be studied in real life contexts.
In the rest of this article, we will consider “misuse” in its broader
meaning, which encompasses the definition provided by the
World Health Organization (WHO), i.e., the use of a substance
for a purpose non consistent with legal or medical guidelines (like
nonmedical use), and the FDA’s one i.e., off-label use (Anderson
et al., 2017).

Methylphenidate
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a highly
prevalent disorder in many countries, with an estimated
prevalence of 5–10% in children worldwide (Lee et al., 2007).
Methylphenidate is a psychostimulant primarily marketed under
the name of Ritalin R , whose first marketing authorization
was given in France in 1995 for ADHD in children aged 6
years or over. Methylphenidate is nowadays broadly used in
many countries. The literature associated with methylphenidate
is abundant (a Medline query on Nov 14th, 2017 with
methylphenidate as keyword retrieved more than 10,000 articles).
We will only provide a broad view of the results published
recently. Over the last two decades, the use of ADHD medication
in US youth has markedly increased. More than 1.5 million US
adults use stimulants labeled for treatment of ADHD (Habel
et al., 2011) and more than 2.7 million children are prescribed
medications to treat ADHD in the U.S. each year, with an increase
from 3.3 to 3.7% (+10.7%) between 2005 and 2012. In Europe,
a repeated cross-sectional design applied to national or regional
data extracts from Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, the
United Kingdom (UK) showed significant increase of ADHD
medication prevalence in the same period with discrepancies
across countries: from 1.8 to 3.9% in the Netherlands (relative
increase: +111.9%), from 1.3 to 2.2% in Germany (+62.4%),
from 0.4 to 1.5% in Denmark (+302.7%), and from 0.3 to 0.5%
in the UK (+56.6%) (Bachmann et al., 2017). The prescription
in France of methylphenidate remains very limited compared to
that of other European countries or North America. The French
Agency for Drug and Health product Safety (ANSM) estimated
that around 49,000 patients (regardless of their age) were given
methylphenidate in France in 2014, most of them being children
between 6 and 11 and teenagers from 12 to 174 . Adherence to
treatment is a significant issue, since 61% of adolescents who

5 http://ansm.sante.fr/S-informer/Points-d-information-Points-d-information/
Donnees-d-utilisation-et-mesures-visant-a-securiser-l-emploi-dumethylphenidate-en-France-publication-par-l-ANSM-d-un-rapport-d-analyseet-d-une-brochure-d-information-a-destination-des-patients-et-de-leurentourage-Point-d-information
6 http://ansm.sante.fr/var/ansm_site/storage/original/application/
fc636dd65bb327b11ceb1725e097bf6e.pdf

4 http://ansm.sante.fr/S-informer/Points-d-information-Points-d-information/

Methylphenidate-donnees-d-utilisation-et-de-securite-d-emploi-en-FrancePoint-d-Information

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

3

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

used to analyze different behavioral health challenges (Yesha
and Gangopadhyay, 2015), to investigate social support (Wang
et al., 2012; Portier et al., 2013), topics that health consumers
discuss when reviewing their health providers online (Brody and
Elhadad, 2010; Hao and Zhang, 2016; Hao et al., 2017), and
quality of life of breast cancer patients (Tapi Nzali et al., 2017).
Topic modeling has also been proven useful to detect messages
reporting ADRs. Yang et al. applied the LDA model to represent
posts in the topic space and were able to extract topics related
to ADRs like (for example) diarrhea for Biaxin (Yang et al.,
2015). A model using Labeled Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LLDA)
(Ramage et al., 2009) exhibited good performance in extracting
ADRs from forum posts (Yates et al., 2015). Recently, we applied
LDA to detect posts describing non-adherence to drug treatment
and tested this approach with posts related to escitalopram (an
antidepressant drug), and aripiprazole (an antipsychotic drug)
with encouraging results.
In the study presented in this article, we decided to use
the Correlated Topic Model (CTM) (Blei and Lafferty, 2006)
to investigate misuse of methylphenidate in forum discussions.
Besides better fitting text corpora, this model takes into account
existing relations between discussed topics. Correlations are
estimated by replacing the prior Dirichlet distribution by a
logistic normal prior. Estimated correlations between topics
indicate to what extent some themes appeared simultaneously in
posts. To our knowledge, this is the first study applying the CTM
to health related forum posts.
In the following sections, we present two automated methods
tailored for drug safety based on social media: (i) signal detection
based on text mining techniques. (ii) an in-depth exploratory
and qualitative analysis of the data related to methylphenidate.
Finally, the benefits and limitations of the approach are discussed.

challenge, and this task will benefit from mining of narratives
about methylphenidate available in social media.

Text Mining
Analysis of a huge number of narrative messages requires
text mining techniques. Information extraction is one of the
typical text mining tasks, whose goal is to create a structured
view of the information presented in human language text,
and to make it more accessible for machine processing. An
initial processing step is Named entity recognition (NER), which
involves identifying in text instances of predefined categories.
Early work in NER systems in the 1990s was aimed primarily
at extraction of people and location names from journalistic
articles. Very quickly NER has been considered in molecular
biology and bioinformatics domain to identify genes and gene
products. Significant effort is also spent on extracting chemical
entities and drug names in the context of the CHEMDNER
competition (Krallinger et al., 2015) for automatic retrieval
from biomedical documents. Once the named entities have been
identified, the subsequent processing step is identification of
semantic relationships between the entities, for example, proteinprotein interactions in bioinformatics (Blaschke et al., 1999),
and chemical-disease relations in biomedical domain (Wei et al.,
2016).
For drug safety monitoring, information extraction is an
essential tool to extract both drug names and adverse reaction
description, and then to identify if there is a causal relationship
between them. Various studies have looked at extracting potential
ADRs from different text sources (Yeleswarapu et al., 2014),
which include Electronic Health Records (EHR) (Wang et al.,
2009; Luo et al., 2017), medical case reports (Gurulingappa
et al., 2012) and MEDLINE abstract (Avillach et al., 2013). More
challenges have appeared when considering using texts from
social media due to the informal and colloquial expressions of
internet users (Liu and Chen, 2015).
Topic modeling is another promising text mining approach,
which aims to discover hidden semantic structures in a collection
of texts. Topic models constitute a set of probabilistic models
allowing to explore, understand and organize large groups of
structured or unstructured data (Blei et al., 2003). This family
of models is based on the hypothesis that documents in the
corpus correspond to a distribution of several topics. No prior
assumption is made about the nature of topics pervaded in the
studied corpus. The outcome of such models is twofold: (i) the
list of thematic in the corpus, (ii) the distribution of topics on
documents, that enables the clustering of similar documents.
By determining discussed topics, topic models provide an
automated process for classifying, organizing and managing
messages. This process can provide a compact description of the
corpus of messages without human intervention. The simplest
form of this kind of models is the Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) (Blei and Lafferty, 2009).
Topic models have been used to analyze messages on social
media in several domains with promising results. Most of
the studies have focused on tweets (Paul and Dredze, 2011,
2014; Prier et al., 2011; Ghosh and Guha, 2013; Zhan et al.,
2017). Regarding forum messages, this approach has been

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Material
Corpus
Messages were collected using the Detec’t extractor, a scraper
developed by Kappa Santé. We selected five popular and
open French forums: www.atoute.org, www.doctissimo.fr, www.
e-sante.fr, www.onmeda.fr (previously www.aufeminin.com)
and sante-medecine.journaldesfemmes.com according to their
popularity and their quality evaluated by the Net scoring
tool (Katsahian et al., 2015). The extraction was based on a
set of 403 drugs from the French Health Insurance database
used as keywords to extract the corpus of messages. All data
extracted was publicly available and anonymized. We identified
all the messages containing these drug names and extracted
the whole discussions containing these messages. To extract
methylphenidate related data, we used the following French
brand names of the drug: Ritaline R , Quasym R , Concerta R
and Medikinet R . The methylphenidate sub corpus contained all
posts where at least one of these drug names was present.
Scraping of these messages was performed according to
the HTML structure of each forum. Posts from the retrieved
discussions were stored in the Detec’t database with all their
metadata (date, author of the post, post ID, URL, name of the

4

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

of heuristics that assign a score to each extracted concept, thus
eliminates the least relevant concepts in order to reduce false
positives. STF also exploits lexical labels (part-of-speech tagging)
to address ambiguity issues.
An ADR may be represented as a ternary relationship
involving a patient, a drug and a symptom related with this
drug through a causal relationship. In addition to causal relation
linguistic patterns that corresponded to five major semantic
relations between these three entities have been identified: (1)
administration (take, test, try, treatment, intake of, etc.), (2)
causal relationship (cause, give, result of, since, because of, etc.),
(3) sensation (suffer, feel, etc.), (4) interruption of treatment (stop
to avoid, to arrest, etc.) and (5) intolerance (endure, allergy, etc.).
With the pre-defined linguistic patterns, we were able to identify
multiple relationships between drugs and symptoms within one
sentence.

forum) and cleaned (removing of ads, and quotation from other
patients).

Medical Thesauri
Three thesauri were used to represent the medical terms:
RacinePharma, the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC)
classification system for drugs7 , and the Medical Dictionary of
Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) for disorders8 . RacinePharma
was used to identify drug names in the messages. This resource
is updated on a monthly basis to follow the modifications in the
French Public Database of Medications9 . Rationale for choosing
RacinePharma is that it covers all medications available on the
French market. All commercial drug names were mapped to
their active substance, allowing for grouping drugs that have
the same active substance. ATC provides a hierarchy of drugs
with five levels: (1) anatomical main group, (2) therapeutic
subgroup, (3) pharmacological subgroup, (4) chemical subgroup
and (5) chemical substance. MedDRA was used to identify
medical terms including symptoms, signs, diseases, diagnoses,
names and results of analysis etc. MedDRA has a hierarchical
structure of five levels: (1) SOC (system organ class), (2) HLGT
(high level group terms), (3) HLT (high level terms), (4) PT
(preferred terms) and (5) LLT (lowest level terms), which
contains lexical information like synonyms, lexical variants, lay
terms etc. Annotation of the ADRs was done using the finest
chemical substance level in ATC and the LLT level in MedDRA.
When assessing the signals, we decided to consider the PT level,
which groups all synonyms that might be used by different
reporters.

Statistic Models for Signal Detection
Signal detection is based on statistical measures of association
describing reporting disproportionality. If the statistical measure
crosses certain threshold, which is summarized as a decision
rule, then signal is declared for a given drug associated with
a given symptom. Evans et al. used Proportional Reporting
Ratio (PRR) to measure the disproportion (Evans et al.,
2001). Rothman et al. improved PRR with Reporting Odds
Ratio (ROR) (Rothman et al., 2004). Bates et al. developed
Bayesian Confidence Propagation Neural Network (BCPNN)
model which considered the information component of drugADR combinations (Bate et al., 1998), and DuMouchel developed
Gamma Poisson Shrinker (GPS) model using Empirical Bayes
Screening to quantify disproportion (DuMouchel, 1999). All
these methods have been evaluated in a number of empirical
studies as well as in several comparative simulation studies (van
Puijenbroek et al., 2002; Roux et al., 2005; Ahmed et al., 2010) as
broadly comparable, and have been used by different regulatory
agencies and drug safety monitoring systems.
We applied all these four methods to our database and
listed the signals detected with each method in Table 5. Our
results showed that more signals were detected with the two
frequentist methods. As the objective of this work was not to
evaluate different signal detection methods, we limited ourselves
to analyze the signals obtained for methylphenidate with PRR
and then compared them with two other sources: (i) the adverse
effects described in the Summary of Product Characteristics
(SPC) of methylphenidate and (ii) the suspected ADRs reported
in Vigibase10 , which is the WHO’s global database for ADRs filled
with Individual Case Safety Reports (ICSRs) collected in over 110
countries and spans over more than 100,000 different medicinal
products.
The automated annotations were parsed with R 3.3.1 xml2
package, and the signal detection was performed using PhViD R
package.

Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics were used to provide first insights on the
characteristics of the corpus (number of messages, origins of
messages, etc.). For the methylphenidate sub corpus, the trends
regarding the numbers of messages across time were analyzed
along with the pharmacovigilance key events related to this drug.
A wordcloud, which is a visual representation of the words
present in a corpus, where the size of the words represents their
frequency in the corpus, was produced to identify the most
frequent words in the methylphenidate sub corpus.

Signal Detection
Identifying ADRs in Posts
This module comprises two steps: the first one consists in
recognizing drug names and medical concepts in text using NER
methods; the second one consists in identifying the semantic
relation between these entities, i.e., the ADR relation. The
Smart Taxonomy Facilitator (STF) Skill CartridgeTM developed
by Expert System was applied on the corpus for the NER
task. It combines a rule-based approach and a dictionary-based
approach. The latter includes two main technologies, (i) Fuzzy
Term Matching, which takes into account possible variants of
the terms present in the taxonomy, thus reducing the number
of false negatives, (ii) Relevance Scoring, which applies a series
7 https://www.whocc.no/atc/structure_and_principles/
8 https://www.meddra.org/

10 https://www.who-umc.org/vigibase/vigibase/

9 http://base-donnees-publique.medicaments.gouv.fr/

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

5

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

Topic Model

The number of topics was determined by choosing the value
maximizing the log-Bayes Factor (Taddy, 2012).
The model was estimated using a Variational Expectation
Maximization (VEM) algorithm. As previously mentioned, the
modeled topics are probability distributions over the words
found in the corpus. To determine each topic, words were ranked
from highest to lowest tf-idf value of their probability in this topic
(Blei and Lafferty, 2009). For each topic, the first 15 words were
designated as the set of characteristic words and used to interpret
its semantics.
We applied the method described above to the formatted
methylphenidate sub corpus, and focused on the topics related
to ADR, misuse and abuse. The posts related to these topics
of interest were analyzed thanks to descending hierarchical
classification (DHC) on observed words. The analyses were
performed using the STM (Structural Topic Model) package
(Roberts et al., 2014) with the R software. The DHC was
performed using the software Iramuteq and the ALCESTE
classification.

Preliminary Data Processing for Topic Model
Preliminary data processing was performed for cleaning and
formatting the methylphenidate sub corpus so that the topic
model can be applied on it and text categorization can be
achieved. To this purpose, the corpus was transformed into a
matrix where each line represents a message and each column
represents a token (i.e., a term present in the corpus). This matrix
is called the document-term matrix (DTM).
Data cleaning was performed as follows:
1. Preprocessing: All words in messages were turned into
lowercases. French accents, punctuation and abusive spaces
between words were removed.
2. Removal of stopwords: In addition to stopwords, the names of
the drug in the messages (e.g., Ritaline R or methylphenidate)
were excluded since this information was already taken into
account as message annotations.
3. Addition of specific tags: Two types of tags were added
to standardize the mentions of doses (numeric characters
followed by “mg” were replaced by the tag “dosemilligrams”)
and of duration (using the tags “nbdays,” “nbweeks,”
“nbmonths” and “nbyears”).
4. Stemming, based on the Porter’s algorithm, was performed to
associate inflected and derived words together with their root
form.

RESULTS
Dataset
Overall Corpus
Twenty one million messages have been extracted. The messages
were all posted between the 1st January 2007 and the 31st
January 2016. This data set was used as a basis for signal
detection. Based on the automatic annotation process described
above, we have identified 31,586 ADRs, concerning 1,426
distinct drug names (representing 1,055 unique ATC codes) and
1,775 distinct symptoms (representing 1,154 unique MedDRA
PTs). The five most common chemical substances involved
were paracetamol, clomifene, venlafaxine, plastic IUD with
progestogen and levothyroxine sodium (Table 1), the five most
common PTs involved were pain, weight increased, fatigue,
nausea and acne (Table 2).

The next phase, formatting, aimed at generating the final
matrix:
1. The list of tokens was created. Tokens were words or
sequences of two words (bigrams) found in the corpus.
Rationale for considering bigrams was to keep nominal groups
like “side effect” (“effet indésirable” in French). The frequency
of each token in the messages was measured.
2. The DTM was then created. Due to important discrepancies in
the vocabulary used in messages, a vast majority of tokens was
associated with a very low number of occurrences in messages.
3. To exclude these words hardly used (including words with
spelling errors), the words present in only a small number
of messages were removed. The threshold was determined
empirically.
4. Finally, we applied DTM weighting, based on term frequency
inverse document frequency (tf-idf) (Salton and McGill, 1986).
Each term in the DTM was weighted according to its
frequency in the document and in the entire corpus.

Sub-corpus of Messages Related to Methylphenidate
The methylphenidate sub corpus contained all messages
belonging to the Detec’t database published between the
1st January 2007 and the 31st January 2016 containing at
least one of the following French brand names: Ritaline R ,
Concerta R , Quasym R and Medikinet R . This corpus contained
3443 messages from five different sources, with 75% of messages
coming from Doctissimo (Table 3). Ritaline R was the most
frequent brand name in the sub-corpus (Table 4).

Probabilistic Models for Topic Estimation

Trends in the Methyphenidate Sub-corpus

In order to determine discussed topics in the methylphenidate
sub corpus and to identify the associated messages, a topic model
was applied on the weighted DTM. We used the Correlated Topic
Model (CTM) because (i) it is based on the Latent Dirichlet
allocation (LDA), which has been proven providing better
semantic coherence and interpretability (Stevens et al., 2012); (ii)
it takes into account existing relations between discussed topics as
an additional parameter. Estimated correlations between topics
indicate to what extent some themes appeared simultaneously
in posts, indicating this way which themes are associated.

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

The distribution of messages per month is displayed in Figure 1.
Methylphenidate use has been in constant increase since 2004.
We identified six main events related to drug safety and
methylphenidate during this period:
1) In 2006, the ANSM (formerly Afssaps) launched a new
national initiative for pharmacovigilance and addictovigilance
monitoring;
2) In 2007, the EMA initiated a review of the safety of
methylphenidate;

6

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

TABLE 1 | Top 10 chemical substances with ADRs on French forums between
2007 and 2016.

TABLE 2 | Top 10 commonly discussed symptoms with ADRs on French forums
between 2007 and 2016.

ATC code

Name

MedDRA PT

N02BE01

Paracetamol

840

Pain

2,417

G03GB02

Clomifene

838

Weight increased

1,425

N06AX16

Venlafaxine

761

Fatigue

986

G02BA03

Intrauterine contraceptive device with progestogen

735

Nausea

903

H03AA01

Levothyroxine sodium

669

Acne

784

N06AB10

Escitalopram

581

Convulsion

682

G03HB01

Cyproterone and estrogen

546

Malaise

654

A03AX12

Phloroglucinol

538

Anxiety

637

N05AX12

Aripiprazole

504

Insomnia

604

N06AB05

Paroxetine

428

Headache

597

Occurrences

Occurrences

TABLE 3 | Messages distribution by forum.

3) In January 2009, the EMA experts stated that the benefits of
methylphenidate continued to outweigh their risks, when they
were used in their approved indication. However, they insisted
on the needs for vigilance regarding long term risks;
4) In June 2011, the French pharmacovigilance published
a warning letter regarding possible long term effects of
medicines containing methylphenidate;
5) In October 2012, the French National Authority for Health
(HAS) published a directive reassessing medicines containing
methylphenidate. Their conclusion was that uncertainties still
existed on medium to long term effects, in particular for
cardiovascular, neurologic and psychiatric effects, and that
there was a risk of non-medical use, misuse and abuse;
6) In July 2013, the ANSM published a report toward health
professionals based on a review of methylphenidate use in
France in order to secure methylphenidate prescription.
Concomitantly, they published a brochure specifically
dedicated to consumers to inform the patients and their
families.

Forum
Atoute

Number of annotations

631

1,134

2,569

4,337

E-sante

227

439

Onmeda

5

12

Sante Medecines

11

12

Doctissimo

TABLE 4 | Methylphenidate brand names distribution.
Forum

Number of annotations

Ritaline®

4,256

Concerta®

1,379

Quasym®

275

Medikinet®

24

drug prescription and intake (“psychiatrist,” “doctor,” “take,”
“medicine,” “treatment,” “dosemilligrams”), childhood (“children,”
“son,” “daughter,” “school,” “parents”) and concerns about adverse
effects (“question,” “problems,” “effect,” “secondary”). No specific
side effect could be observed at this point, although some words
associated with this topic (like “effect,” “secondary,” “bad” and
“problem”) were present in many discussions. The wordcloud
showed a high frequency of words related to the use of
methylphenidate by children and consistent with the primary
indication of the drug. No hints for misuse could be identified
at this point.

The comparison of key events and trends in messages did not
reveal any association between those two phenomena, except for
the HAS directive in 2012 (event #5), which was associated with a
higher number of forum discussions related to methylphenidate
in the following months.

Word cloud of messages with presence/Take of
methylphenidate
First clues of topics discussed in the corpus were given by the
analysis of the wordcloud. In Figure 2 are displayed the most
frequent words present in the methylphenidate corpus after
translation from French to English. Starting from the 100 most
frequent words, translation from French to English led to a total
of 77 distinct English words (for example “take” corresponds
to both “prends” and “prendre”). The most frequent words
were “take,” “children,” and “dosemilligrams.” As mentioned
before, the term “dosemilligrams” was used as a tag to replace
and standardize the mention of dose in all the messages.
Several lexical fields are represented in the methylphenidate
wordcloud such as ADHD (“ADHD,” “disorder,” “concentration”),

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

Number of messages

Detected ADRs and Signals
We identified 61 ADRs associated to methylphenidate with causal
relationship in the corpus, which corresponded to 39 distinct
effects and eight MedDRA SOC level terms (Table 5), upon
the 3,443 messages with methylphenidate mention. The most
common effects were psychiatric effects (25 cases, 41%) and
nervous system disorders (19 cases, 31%). Weight loss was also
mentioned, and one case of cardiac side effect was reported. Side
effects of SOC cardiac disorders and nervous system disorders

7

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

FIGURE 1 | Number of methylphenidate messages across time. Indexes of key events are indicated inside red circles.

FIGURE 2 | Wordcloud on the methylphenidate corpus.

were considered of particular interest, since the ANSM expressed
concerns about cardiac effects (hypertension, heart rhythm
disorders) and neurological adverse events (migraine, stroke) in
2011 and 2012.
Two pharmacovigilance experts (ALL and CB) manually
reviewed the content of these messages. In cases where
the same ADRs were mentioned multiple times in the
same messages, or where patients posted the same message
several times, the duplicates were removed. After removing
these duplicates, we obtained 57 relevant cases posted
in 46 messages, including 28 messages written by the
patient, and 18 posted by a relative, mostly the patient’s
parents.

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

61.4% of the ADRs (35 of 57) were validated by the experts,
whereas 38.6% (22 of 57) were considered as false positives. For
example, in one message the patient talked about his treatment
of ADHD, by methyphenidate and his mother having a cancer:
cancer was annotated by the system as an ADR, but it was a false
positive.
There were 33 additional ADRs in the messages
that have not been automatically identified. These
ADRs were not easily detectable as the name of
the drug was not present in the same sentence as
these effects. These missing adverse effects included
sleep disorder, weight decrease, gastrointestinal disorder and
decreased appetite.

8

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

TABLE 5 | Comparison of detected ADRs of methylphenidate with SPC and Vigibase.
SOC

Frequency

PT

Detected as a signal

Described in SPC

PRR

ROR

BCPNN

MGPS

Reported in VigiBase

Psychiatric disorders

22

1

Aggression

3

x

x

x

x

2

Psychotic disorder

3

x

x

x

x

x

3

Anger

2

x

x

x

x

x

x

4

Anxiety

2

5

Abnormal behavior

1

x

x

x

x
x

6

Affective disorder

1

x

x

x

x

x

7

Delusion

1

8

Dependence

1

x

x

x

9

Depression

1

x

x

10

Euphoric mood

1

11

Negativism

1

12

Nervousness

1

x
x
x

x

13

Paranoia

1

x

x

14

Sleep disorder

1

x

x

15

Stress

1

16

Substance abuse

1

x

x

Nervous system disorders

17

x

x

x

x

x

x

17

Psychomotor hyperactivity

4

x

x

x

x

18

Headache

3

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

19

Convulsion

3

20

Insomnia

2

21

Tic

2

22

Dyslexia

1

23

Crying

24

25.

x

1

x

x

x

Poor quality sleep

1

x

x

x

Psychiatric disorders, nervous system
disorders

2

Disturbance in attention

2

x

x

Investigations

8
3

x

x

27.

Amphetamines

2

x

x

28.

Heart sounds

1

x

x

29.

Neuropsychological test

1

30.

Weight

1

General disorders and administration
site conditions

7

31.

Fatigue

3

32.

Malaise

2

33.

Drug intolerance

1

34.

Rebound effect

1

Psychiatric disorders, general disorders
and administration site conditions

1

Irritability

1

Cardiac disorders

1

Palpitations

1

Musculoskeletal and connective tissue
disorders

1

Muscle spasms

1

37.

38.

39.

Metabolism and nutrition disorders

1

Decreased appetite

1

Neoplasms benign, malignant and
unspecified (incl cysts and polyps)

1

Neoplasm malignant

1

Total

61

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

x

x

Weight decreased

36.

x

x

x

26.

35.

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x
x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

9

x

x

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

We identified several cases of drug abuse. In one message the
mother disclosed taking her son’s treatment and experiencing
positive effects on her mood; the other case of misuse was
about snorting Ritalin. Four patients had incoherent speech
probably caused by delusional ideas, which made it impossible
to conclude whether the effect was the consequence of taking
methylphenidate or the manifestation of a psychiatric disorder.
For example, one patient declared that her psychiatrist had
prescribed several times the same treatment, using a pictorial
expression “multiplication of Ritalins.” Four patients described
addictions to other products such as amphetamine or cannabis
and four other patients described abusing methylphenidate.
Methylphenidate was inefficient in seven patients.
In some cases, the patient perceived the adverse effect as
a beneficial effect, for example, one patient considered weight
loss and decrease of appetite as a positive effect, and another
patient said “it wakes me up and I’m more motivated, it has an
antidepressant effect and I had euphoria.”
Considering the signals detected using PRR, the overlap
with other data sources was important: 66.7% of the identified
relationships (26 of 39) are detected as a signal, among which,
38.5% (10 of 26) have been mentioned in the product SPC,
and 88.5% (23 of 26) have been alarmed in VigiBase. We
obtained signals for neuro-psychiatric symptoms but also for a
cardiac symptom (palpitations). The missing adverse effects (false
negatives) could potentially enhance certain signals. Despite
some false negatives, sleep disorder and weight decreased have
still been detected.

Analysis of Topics of Interest
A Descending Hierarchical Classification (DHC) was performed
on the topic associated with issues encountered while using
the products in normal conditions (Topic 6—Side effects and
dosage), on the topic related with use of methylphenidate by
adults (Topic 8—Care pathways for adults), and on two topics
that could be related to misuse (Topic 4—Other products and
Topic 7—Negativity and fears).

Side effects (Topic 6)
Classification on Topic 6 identified 6 clusters (Figure 4). Most of
messages (clusters 1, 2, 3, 4, 6) were related to the characteristics
of the treatment, including dosage, effects, duration of the effects,
initiation of the treatment. The messages in cluster 5 dealt with
side effects, including loss of appetite, loss of weight, nausea,
vomiting and fatigue.

Methylphenidate use by adults (Topic 8)
The DHC performed on Topic 8 (Care pathways—Adults)
identified 3 clusters (Figure 5). Messages from adult patients
diagnosed with ADHD were present in cluster 1. Some patients
reported on very late diagnosis of ADHD, difficulties during
childhood related to the absence of diagnosis at this time,
and the positive effects of the treatment after the first intakes
despite some negative effects. Several people reported difficulties
to get an accurate diagnosis, confusion between ADHD and
bipolarity, and difficulties to be tested when adults (cluster 2). In
cluster 3, we found messages associated with dosage, treatment
regimes, and cessation of treatment. One message was about
methylphenidate for hypersomnia.

Topic Analysis
Overall Analysis
At the end of the preprocessing steps, we obtained a DTM
containing 1,560 tokens and 3,416 messages. The application of
the model identified 14 topics. The topics and their characteristic
words (translated in English) are presented in Table 6.
A message was considered associated to a topic when it
contained a proportion of words in the message associated to this
topic superior to a threshold determined empirically (in our case
19%). The number of messages associated with each topic and the
correlations between the topics are displayed in Figure 3.
The most represented topics were Child history, Treatment
initiation and Side effects and dosage. The seven most frequent
topics reflected usage that was consistent with the authorized
indications of methylphenidate, even if there were some concerns
with the product. Correlations were found within this list of seven
topics, with associations between Child health care and Child
history, as well as between Temporality and Treatment initiation,
which seemed quite coherent.
Misuse could be identified in the topic named Other products,
which included words like “cocaine” and “sleeping pill” and terms
related with depression and anxiety (“depression,” “Xanax R ”
and “Wellbutrin R ”). The topic Negativity and Fears contained
words negatively connotated (“fear,” “interruption”) and words
related to schizophrenia (“schizophrenia,” “schizophrenic”). Use of
methylphenidate by adults could also be identified through the
topic Care pathways for adults.

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

Misuse (Topics 4 and 7)
The DHC conducted to the identification of 3 clusters in
Topic 4 (Figure 6). Most messages (clusters 1 and 3) were
broad discussions about methylphenidate, and the potential
dangers of taking it, as described in published articles. A
comparison was made by some users between methylphenidate
and other drugs (Paxil R , Prozac R , Deroxat R , Zoloft R ). Part of
this topic (cluster 2) dealt with the effects of methylphenidate
and its similarities with amphetamines (some patients reported
having tried both). Comparisons were also made with cocaine.
Some cases of misuse of methylphenidate were identified. They
consisted in parents taking the drug prescribed to their children
to experiment its effects, students trying to enhance their abilities,
and recreative effects.
Classification on Topic 7 (Negativity and fears) conducted
to 2 clusters (Figure 7). Some messages (cluster 1) were
written by patients taking both an antipsychotic drug (Abilify R )
and methylphenidate. Two messages were about quitting
methylphenidate and Abilify R . In one message the patient
considered that Abilify R had caused a disturbance in attention.
One person decided to quit methylphenidate and to buy
amphetamines instead.
Cases of misuse were also found, like one message about
“snorting” methylphenidate while working.

10

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

TABLE 6 | Topics in the methylphenidate corpus.
Topic name

Characteristics words

1. Questions

Thanks, would like, testimony, medical, answer, someone, good evening, come, know if, neurologist, since, help, in advance,
question, know

2. Positive treatment effects

Adhd, certain, case, person, effectively, a lot, allow, task, when, positive, some, people, shrink, other, pathology

3. ADHD

Child, trouble, add, attention, hyperactive, the hyperactivity, adhd, attention disorder, scolar, hyperactivity, difficult, diagnostic, deficit,
attention, result

4. Other products

Withdrawal, medical, cocaine, secondary effect, depression, wellbutrin, anti, effect, secondary, psychiatric, product, rivotril,
prescription, sleeping pill, xanax

5. Prescription

Medical, prescription, magnesium, prescribed, prescribe, reembourse, attending physician, attending, product, site, psychiatrist,
prescribe, non-specialized, see doctor, adhd

6. Side effects and dosage

Secondary effect, effect, secondary, dose, morning, dosage, effect, strattera, no effect, biphentine, of secondary effect, loss appetite,
start treatment, take, evening

7. Negativity and fears

Doc, fear, thing, buy, shrink, skill, impression, awareness, email, interruption, schizophrenic, medicine, schizophrenia, return, state

8. Care pathways (adults)

I was, I had, risperdal, crisis, during, nausea, neurologist, psychiatrist, did not have, did, ocd, fatigue, had, start, interruption

9. Child health care

Child, hyper, son, sister, pedopsychiatrist, house, hyperactive, fright, lesson, cry, clever, kiss, forget, husband, heart

10. Treatment initiation

Medicine, impression, really, good, try, take, add, know if, sensation, coming, good, take, concentrated, get better, should

11. Child history

Son, nbyears, scolar, daughter year, neuropediatrician, home, boy, pedo, treatment, help him/her, since, get better, appointment,
years and a half, on since

12. Temporality

Evening, morning, sleep, day, wish, night, sleep, Monday, every, tomorrow, bed, job, well, all alone, hard

13. Studies and papers

Study, disorder, treatment, diagnostic, article, in particular, child, clinical, anti, research, schizophrenic, associated, psychiatric,
analysis, answer

14. Non-identified

Awareness, measure, condition, field, skill, alone, of a, question, affect, recognize, sadly, absence, schizophrenic, represent, through

FIGURE 3 | Topics description. (A) Messages distribution per topic. (B) Correlations between topics. Positive correlations are indicated in yellow. Negative
correlations are indicated in blue.

Cluster 2 contained messages about methylphenidate and
autism. For example, two messages were dealing with persons
diagnosed Asperger and ADHD.

the most represented topics were related to Childhood and
Treatment initiation, but also Side effects. Cases of misuse were
also identified in this corpus, including recreational use and
abuse.

Summary of the Results

DISCUSSION

We automaticallyidentified 3443 posts about methylphenidate
from the corpus of 21 millions messages published between
2007 and 2016, among which 61 adverse drug reactions (ADR)
were automatically detected. Two pharmacovigilance experts
evaluated manually the quality of automatic identification,
and a f-measure of 0.57 was reached. Patient’s reports were
mainly neuro-psychiatric effects. Applying PRR, 67% of the
ADRs were signals, including most of the neuro-psychiatric
symptoms but also palpitations. Topic modeling showed that
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

Pharmacovigilance and Methylphenidate
In this study, text mining techniques were used to detect ADRs
in social media with encouraging results. Starting with the overall
corpus of messages containing drug names, the system was able
to detect messages with potential ADRs. A manual review was
however needed to exclude some false positives when the message
was unclear. Moreover, our approach demonstrated its ability
to detect phamacovigilance signals. 66.7% of the relationships
11

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

FIGURE 4 | Results of the DHC applied on Topic 6—Side effects and dosage. (A) Dendrogram. (B) Words constituting each cluster.

FIGURE 5 | Results of the DHC applied on Topic 8—Care pathways (adults). (A) Dendrogram. (B) Words constituting each cluster.

patients suffering from psychosis. Cases of abuse could be
identified too, e.g., using methylphenidate for recreative effects,
snorting methylphenidate and replacing methylphenidate by
amphetamines. Interestingly, some discussions stressed positive
effects of the drug.
Further analysis could be done to identify pharmacovigilance
issues related to methylphenidate. In this analysis, we compared
the trend of messages across time with the key pharmacovigilance
events related to methylphenidate, but it could interesting
to compare the number of ADR across time to particular
circumstances, like examination periods, as it has been
presented by the EMA during the workshop on social media
in 201611 . The presented analysis of 5000 tweets about
methylphenidate and their trend comparison with examination
periods yielded to the suggestion that misuse could be found in
educational institutions at time of examinations, supporting our
conclusions.

involving methylphenidate extracted automatically from social
media (26 out of 39) have been detected as a signal. Among
these, 88.5% have been alarmed in VigiBase. An example of
ADRs associated with methylphenidate that was detected as
a signal from social media but not in VigiBase is muscle
spasms. These results suggest that messages in forum could
be used as an additional data source of knowledge for drug
safety.
The topic analysis demonstrated that most topics in posts
about methylphenidate were related to usage that was consistent
with the marketing authorization. However, adverse events
were a significant concern among the patients, corresponding
to the third most discussed topic. Effects identified by topic
modeling included psychiatric symptoms, effects on nervous
system, loss of appetite, loss of weight, nausea, vomiting and
fatigue. Methylphenidate use by specific populations like adults
could be identified. Misuse was also a topic patients dealt with,
including non-medical use and off-label use. Non-medical use
that patients reported included parents testing methylphenidate
prescribed to their children and students trying to enhance
their abilities. Off-label use included methylphenidate use in

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

11 http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Presentation/2016/
11/WC500216438.pdf

12

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

FIGURE 6 | Results of the DHC applied on Topic 4—Other products. (A) Dendrogram. (B) Words constituting each cluster.

FIGURE 7 | Results of the DHC applied on Topic 7—Negativity and fears. (A) Dendrogram. (B) Words constituting each cluster.

drugs14 , but has provided no guidance on the way social media
should be monitored for pharmacovigilance signals.
The EMA recommends that “The marketing authorization
holders should regularly screen the internet or digital
media (web site, web page, blog, vlog, social network,
internet forum, chat room, health portal, etc.) under
their management or responsibility, for potential reports
of suspected adverse reactions 15 .” Therefore, it is

This work emphasizes the potential interest of monitoring
adverse drug reactions on social media but there is still
insufficient evidence to define how such monitoring should be
integrated within the current pharmacovigilance process. The US
Food and Drug Administration has published recommendations
for the industry when using social media12 which describe how
risk and benefit Information for drugs should be presented13 or
the correction of independent third-party misinformation about
12 https://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/

14 https://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidances/ucm401079.pdf

OfficeofMedicalProductsandTobacco/CDER/ucm397791.htm
13 https://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidances/ucm401087.pdf

15 http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

Regulatory_and_procedural_guideline/2017/08/WC500232767.pdf

13

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

future. Moreover, we showed that, besides ADRs, social media
could be used to identify unexpected misuse behaviors—like
parents taking pills prescribed to their child—that are impossible
to detect from other sources.

not mandatory to monitor adverse drug reactions on
digital media, which are not considered to be company
sponsored.
The EMA is participating to the Innovative Medicines
Initiative (IMI) Web-Recognizing Adverse Drug Reactions
(RADR) project (Ghosh and Lewis, 2015). According to the
report of the Work Package 1 Workshop, “It is likely that the
social media utility will proof beneficial mainly for niche areas.
It could also be tailored to the safety profile of a product or to be
used as a source to answer specific regulatory questions where an
aggregate review could be required16 .” The current study showed
that applying topic models to niche areas such as evaluation of
abuse and misuse was efficient for investigating such issues with
methylphenidate. It is desirable to investigate how social media
could help regulatory authorities to explore other niche areas
such as exposure during pregnancy or early monitoring of new
products.

Limitations
A limitation of our study is inherent to the particularities
of social network users who do not reflect the characteristics
of patients population. This population bias was described by
Ghosh and Guha (2013) for Twitter, and there is still an
important lack of information regarding users’ profiles. However,
contrasting with tweets, the narratives that we focused on
provided detailed information about patients’ attitudes toward
methylphenidate.
Although we obtained interesting performance regarding
automatic identification of ADRs, the approach may be
improved. Most of the false negatives were due to the constraint
of sentence boundary of the cartridge, i.e., the automatic tool was
asked to identify causal relationships between drug and symptom
within the same sentence. Although the system was able to detect
signals despite these false negatives, the current study showed
that further work is needed to improve the power of our method.
On the other hand, the false positives were due to (1) imprecise
normalization of symptoms to MedDRA terms, (2) spelling and
grammatical mistakes in colloquial expression.
In our dataset, the proportion of drug-event combinations of
methylphenidate with one, two, three and four or more reports
was 64.1, 17.9, 15.4, and 2.6% respectively, compared to 50.6,
27.8, 6.7, and 14.9% for all drug-event combinations, showing
that methylphenidate is a less than average reported medication
and that most of the ADRs are of very small frequencies, which
makes it unsuitable to apply signal detection methods with
criteria “3 or more cases” as decision rule. As our main objective
was to illustrate with methylphenidate our methods of using
text-mining tools for social media data, but not to compare
different signal detection methods or to compare signals of
methylphenidate with other drugs, we just listed the signals of
methylphenidate with four most common used signal detection
methods based on disproportionality, and did not explore all
the signals in this work. However, these methods might be not
absolutely appropriate for social media data, thus require further
evaluation and potential adaptation and improvement.
Topic modeling also exhibits some limitations. Inherent to the
topic model is the need that a human labels each topic, based
on the list of characteristics words. Labeling of the topics by
human brings subjectivity to this task (Ghosh and Guha, 2013).
A solution to minimize this impact could be to perform double
blind labeling of topics by two different experts. However, this
step could be time-consuming in case of a huge number of topics,
as described in another study (Tapi Nzali et al., 2017).
The sensitivity of topic models is rather low: very specific and
sparse subjects would not be identified, as they are not discussed
enough to generate a topic, as described by Prier et al. (2011). The
precision of the model, however, is high.
Another limitation lies on the way topics are applied on words.
As described, words are stemmed in order to be grouped together
when they have common feature or pattern. However, stemming

Strengths
Determining which co-occurrences of drugs and symptoms
in messages are true ADRs is a challenging task because
of the complexity of modeling the linguistic pattern of
causality. However, our study demonstrates the feasibility of
the extraction of information on drugs and related ADRs
from Web forums. We implemented a lexicon-based method
to extract drug names and medical entities from posts. The
system was based on the Smart Taxonomy Facilitator (STF)
Skill CartridgeTM developed by Expert System. The system
exhibits good NER performance, with F-measures of 0.94 and
0.81 for recognition of drugs and symptoms respectively (Chen
et al., 2017). These results are similar to those obtained by
other authors on messages in English (Lardon et al., 2015).
Regarding French language social media, Morlane-Hondere
et al. obtained a F-measure of 0.95 for chemicals, 0.86 for
signs/symptoms and 0.82 for diseases using classifiers based
on Conditional Random Fields and Support Vector Machines,
which is also equivalent to our results (Morlane-Hondère
et al., 2016). We retrieved in social media several signals
that were found associated with methylphenidate in traditional
data sources. We did not detect new ADR signals related to
methylphenidate from our corpus. We plan to conduct a more
extensive and systematic comparison of the ADRs on other
drugs
Topic modeling approaches are rather new in medical
domain, and most of the studies have focused on tweets rather
than web forums. Other studies focusing on medical themes and
forums messages like (Yang et al., 2015; Tapi Nzali et al., 2017)
used the same LDA model. Two pharmacovigilance experts of
our consortium (ALL and CB) performed an internal analysis of
our results and concluded that this approach was a useful method
that enhances expert’ s ability to explore and analyze huge sets
of text data. Above all, topic modeling performs automated
annotation of such large datasets with latent “topic” information.
We plan to conduct further evaluation with more experts in the
16 http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Report/2017/02/

WC500221615.pdf

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

14

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

example if we were to study non observance to methylphenidate.
Another subject that could be analyzed more in-depth is adults
having difficulties to get a diagnosis about hyperactivity and
getting incorrect diagnosis. Advantages of using hypothesis-free
models like topic models are their ability to highlight unknown
issues that could benefit from further investigation and to provide
health professional with further insights on patient behaviors.

can conduct to group words with similar structure but different
meanings. On the other hand, some words with similar meaning
can have very different structures (for example the different forms
of a conjugated verb in French). Lemmatization could be of help
to overcome this issue.

Complementarity of Approaches
We developed two different approaches to analyze information
automatically extracted from social media, signal detection and
topic analysis. They provide complementary perspectives to
understand the impact of a drug on patients. Signal detection
allows to identify specific data related to possible new side
effects. Topic models, on the other hand, provide an exploratory
approach allowing to discover more qualitative information
about the problematic related to drug use. Topic models allow
to identify information nonspecifically investigated in the first
place and to discover unexpected issues that can be more
deeply investigated afterwards. In our study, we identified
patients that presented psychiatric comorbidities (autism or
schizophrenia) in addition to ADHD; we also identified posts
where the patients compared the effect of methylphenidate to
effects of amphetamines and cocaine, methylphenidate being
called by these patients “low cost cocaine.” Contrasting with
these messages, several patients or their relatives expressed fears
about the dangers of methylphenidate and the possible addiction
to the drug. These fears could be taken into consideration for

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The two first authors, XC and CF contributed equally to the
manuscript. XC, CF, and AB conceived the study. XC, CF,
and AB designed the protocol, conducted the study, analyzed
the results and drafted the manuscript. CF, PF, NT and SS
developed the topic models. CH, SP and BD developed the
NLP modules. XC, AG-A, PK, SK, and AB developed the signal
detection module. CB and AL-L-L reviewed the messages and
contributed to the analysis and evaluation steps. All authors
discussed the results and contributed to the manuscript. All the
authors were involved in the ADR-PRISM project (coordinator:
NT).

FUNDING
The study was conducted as part of the ADR-PRISM project
(FUI) coordinated by NT.

REFERENCES

Blaschke, C., Andrade, M. A., Ouzounis, C., and Valencia, A. (1999). Automatic
extraction of biological information from scientific text: protein-protein
interactions. Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Mol. Biol. 7, 60–67.
Blei, D. M., and Lafferty, J. D. (2006). “Correlated topic models,” in Proceedings of
the 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning (Pittsburgh, PA: MIT
Press), 113–120.
Blei, D. M., and Lafferty, J. D. (2009). “Topic models,” in Text Mining:
Classification, Clustering, and Applications, Vol. 10, eds A. N. Srivastava and
M. Sahami (Boca Raton, FL: Chapman and Hall/CRC), 34.
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., and Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet allocation. J. Mach.
Learn. Res. 3, 993–1022. doi: 10.1162/jmlr.2003.3.4-5.993
Bousquet, C., Dahamna, B., Guillemin-Lanne, S., Darmoni, S. J., Faviez, C., Huot,
C., et al. (2017). The adverse drug reactions from patient reports in social
media project: five major challenges to overcome to operationalize analysis
and efficiently support pharmacovigilance process. JMIR Res. Protoc. 6:e179.
doi: 10.2196/resprot.6463
Brody, S., and Elhadad, N. (2010). “Detecting salient aspects in online reviews of
health providers,” in AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings (Washington, DC),
202–206.
Chen, X., Deldossi, M., Aboukhamis, R., Faviez, C., Dahamna, B., Karapetiantz, P.,
et al. (2017). Mining adverse drug reactions in social media with named entity
recognition and semantic methods. Stud. Health Technol. Inform. 245, 322–326.
doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-830-3-322
Cooper, W. O., Habel, L. A., Sox, C. M., Chan, K. A., Arbogast, P. G., Cheetham, T.
C., et al. (2011). ADHD drugs and serious cardiovascular events in children and
young adults. New Eng. J. Med. 365, 1896–1904. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1110212
Deline, S., Baggio, S., Studer, J., N’Goran, A. A., Dupuis, M., Henchoz, Y.,
et al. (2014). Use of neuroenhancement drugs: prevalence, frequency and use
expectations in Switzerland. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 11, 3032–3045.
doi: 10.3390/ijerph110303032
Dietz, P., Striegel, H., Franke, A. G., Lieb, K., Simon, P., and Ulrich, R. (2013).
Randomized response estimates for the 12-month prevalence of cognitiveenhancing drug use in university students. Pharmacotherapy 33, 44–50.
doi: 10.1002/phar.1166

Ahmed, I., Thiessard, F., Miremont-Salamé, G., Bégaud, B., and Tubert-Bitter, P.
(2010). Pharmacovigilance data mining with methods based on false discovery
rates: a comparative simulation study. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 88, 492–498.
doi: 10.1038/clpt.2010.111
Alatawi, Y. M., and Hansen, R. A. (2017). Empirical estimation of underreporting in the U.S. Food and Drug Administration Adverse Event
Reporting System (FAERS). Expert Opin. Drug Saf. 16, 761–767.
doi: 10.1080/14740338.2017.1323867
Anderson, L. S., Bell, H. G., Gilbert, M., Davidson, J. E., Winter, C., Barratt, M.
J., et al. (2017). Using social listening data to monitor misuse and nonmedical
use of bupropion: a content analysis. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 3:e6.
doi: 10.2196/publichealth.6174
Avillach, P., Dufour, J.-C., Diallo, G., Salvo, F., Joubert, M., Thiessard, F., et al.
(2013). Design and validation of an automated method to detect known
adverse drug reactions in MEDLINE: a contribution from the EU–ADR
project. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 20, 446–452. doi: 10.1136/amiajnl-2012-0
01083
Awudu, G. A. H., and Besag, F. M. C. (2014). Cardiovascular effects of
methylphenidate, amphetamines and atomoxetine in the treatment of
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: an update. Drug Saf. 37, 661–676.
doi: 10.1007/s40264-014-0201-8
Bachmann, C. J., Wijlaars, L. P., Kalverdijk, L. J., Burcu, M., Glaeske, G., SchuilingVeninga, C. C. M., et al. (2017). Trends in ADHD medication use in children
and adolescents in five western countries, 2005–2012. Eur. Neuropsychopharm.
27, 484–493. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2017.03.002
Bate, A., Lindquist, M., Edwards, I. R., Olsson, S., Orre, R., Lansner, A., et al.
(1998). A Bayesian neural network method for adverse drug reaction signal
generation. Eur. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 54, 315–321. doi: 10.1007/s0022800
50466
Benson, K., Flory, K., Humphreys, K. L., and Lee, S. S. (2015). Misuse of stimulant
medication among college students: a comprehensive review and meta-analysis.
Clin. Child Fam. Psychol. Rev. 18, 50–76. doi: 10.1007/s10567-014-0177-z

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

15

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

Duh, M. S., Cremieux, P., Audenrode, M. V., Vekeman, F., Karner, P.,
Zhang, H., et al. (2016). Can social media data lead to earlier detection of
drug-related adverse events? Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 25, 1425–1433.
doi: 10.1002/pds.4090
DuMouchel, W. (1999). Bayesian data mining in large frequency tables, with
an application to the fda spontaneous reporting system. Am. Stat. 53,
177–190.
Evans, S. J., Waller, P. C., and Davis, S. (2001). Use of proportional reporting ratios
(PRRs) for signal generation from spontaneous adverse drug reaction reports.
Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 10, 483–486. doi: 10.1002/pds.677
Ghosh, D. D., and Guha, R. (2013). What are we “tweeting” about obesity?
Mapping tweets with topic modeling and geographic information system.
cartography and geographic information science. Cartogr. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 40,
90–102. doi: 10.1080/15230406.2013.776210
Ghosh, R., and Lewis, D. (2015). Aims and approaches of Web-RADR:
a consortium ensuring reliable ADR reporting via mobile devices and
new insights from social media. Expert Opin. Drug Saf. 14, 1845–1853.
doi: 10.1517/14740338.2015.1096342
Golder, S., Norman, G., and Loke, Y. K. (2015). Systematic review on the
prevalence, frequency and comparative value of adverse events data in social
media. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 80, 878–888. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12746
Gurulingappa, H., Mateen-Rajpu, A., and Toldo, L. (2012). Extraction of potential
adverse drug events from medical case reports. J. Biomed. Semantics 3:15.
doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-3-15
Habel, L. A., Cooper, W. O., Sox, C. M., Chan, K. A., Fireman, B. H.,
Arbogast, P. G., et al. (2011). ADHD medications and risk of serious
cardiovascular events in young and middle-aged adults. JAMA 306, 2673–2683.
doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.1830
Hao, H., and Zhang, K. (2016). The voice of Chinese health consumers: a text
mining approach to web-based physician reviews. J. Med. Internet Res. 18:e108.
doi: 10.2196/jmir.4430
Hao, H., Zhang, K., Wang, W., and Gao, G. (2017). A tale of two
countries: international comparison of online doctor reviews between
China and the United States. Int. J. Med. Inform. 99, 37–44.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2016.12.007
Hazell, L., and Shakir, S. A. W. (2006). Under-reporting of adverse
drug reactions : a systematic review. Drug Saf. 29, 385–396.
doi: 10.2165/00002018-200629050-00003
Katsahian, S., Simond Moreau, E., Leprovost, D., Lardon, J., Bousquet, C.,
Kerdelhué, G., et al. (2015). Evaluation of internet social networks using net
scoring tool: a case study in adverse drug reaction mining. Stud. Health Technol.
Inform. 210, 526–530. doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-512-8-526
Kosse, R. C., Bouvy, M. L., Philbert, D., de Vries, T. W., and Koster,
E. S. (2017). Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder medication use in
adolescents: the patient’s perspective. J. Adolesc. Health. 61, 619–625.
doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2017.05.027
Koutkias, V. G., Lillo-Le Louët, A., and Jaulent, M.-C. (2017). Exploiting
heterogeneous publicly available data sources for drug safety surveillance:
computational framework and case studies. Expert Opin. Drug Saf. 16, 113–124.
doi: 10.1080/14740338.2017.1257604
Krallinger, M., Leitner, F., Rabal, O., Vazquez, M., Oyarzabal, J., and Valencia, A.
(2015). CHEMDNER: the drugs and chemical names extraction challenge. J.
Cheminform. 7:S1. doi: 10.1186/1758-2946-7-S1-S1
Lamas, E., Salinas, R., Ferrer, M., Bousquet, C., and Vuillaume, D. (2016).
Lay crowd-sourced expertise (LCE) and its influence on the new role of
patients: ethical and societal issues. Stud. Health Technol. Inform. 228, 80–84.
doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-678-1-80
Laranjo, L., Arguel, A., Neves, A. L., Gallagher, A. M., Kaplan, R., Mortimer, N.,
et al. (2015). The influence of social networking sites on health behavior change:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 22, 243–256.
doi: 10.1136/amiajnl-2014-002841
Lardon, J., Abdellaoui, R., Bellet, F., Asfari, H., Souvignet, J., Texier, N.,
et al. (2015). Adverse drug reaction identification and extraction in social
media: a scoping review. J. Med. Internet Res. 17:e171. doi: 10.2196/
jmir.4304
Lee, S. I., Hong, S. D., Kim, S.-Y., Kim, E.-J., Kim, J.-H., Kim, J.-H., et al.
(2007). Efficacy and tolerability of OROS methylphenidate in Korean children
with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol.

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

Biol.
Psychiatry
31,
210–216.
doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2006.
09.002
Liu, X., and Chen, H. (2015). A research framework for pharmacovigilance
in health social media: identification and evaluation of patient adverse
drug event reports. J. Biomed. Inform. 58, 268–279. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.
10.011
Luo, Y., Thompson, W. K., Herr, T. M., Zeng, Z., Berendsen, M. A.,
Jonnalagadda, S. R., et al. (2017). Natural language processing for EHRbased pharmacovigilance: a structured review. Drug Saf. 40, 1075–1089.
doi: 10.1007/s40264-017-0558-6
Majori, S., Gazzani, D., Pilati, S., Paiano, J., Sannino, A., Ferrari, S.,
et al. (2017). Brain doping: stimulants use and misuse among a
sample of Italian college students. J. Prev. Med. Hyg. 58, E130–E140.
doi: 10.15167/2421-4248/jpmh2017.58.2.630
Morlane-Hondère, F., Grouin, C., and Zweigenbaum, P. (2016). “Identification
of drug-related medical conditions in social media,” in Presented at the
Proceedings of LREC, eds N. Calzolari, K. Choukri, T. Declerck, S. Goggi,
M. Grobelnik, B. Maegaard, J. Mariani, H. Mazo, A. Moreno, J. Odijk,
and S. Piperidis (PortoroŽ). Available online at: http://www.lrec-conf.org/
proceedings/lrec2016/index.html
Nikfarjam, A., Sarker, A., O’Connor, K., Ginn, R., and Gonzalez, G. (2015).
Pharmacovigilance from social media: mining adverse drug reaction mentions
using sequence labeling with word embedding cluster features. J. Am. Med.
Inform. Assoc. 22, 671–681. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocu041
Pages, A., Bondon-Guitton, E., Montastruc, J. L., and Bagheri, H. (2014).
Undesirable effects related to oral antineoplastic drugs: comparison between
patients’ internet narratives and a national pharmacovigilance database. Drug
Saf. 37, 629–637. doi: 10.1007/s40264-014-0203-6
Paul, M. J., and Dredze, M. (2011). A Model for Mining Public Health Topics from
Twitter. Technical Report, Johns Hopkins University.
Paul, M. J., and Dredze, M. (2014). Discovering health topics in social media
using topic models. PLoS ONE 9:e103408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.01
03408
Portier, K., Greer, G. E., Rokach, L., Ofek, N., Wang, Y., Biyani, P.,
et al. (2013). Understanding topics and sentiment in an online cancer
survivor community. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. Monogr. 2013, 195–198.
doi: 10.1093/jncimonographs/lgt025
Powell, G. E., Seifert, H. A., Reblin, T., Burstein, P. J., Blowers, J., Menius, J. A., et al.
(2016). Social media listening for routine post-marketing safety surveillance.
Drug Saf. 39, 443–454. doi: 10.1007/s40264-015-0385-6
Prier, K. W., Smith, M. S., Giraud-Carrier, C., and Hanson, C. L. (2011).
“Identifying health-related topics on Twitter,” in Social Computing, BehavioralCultural Modeling and Prediction (Berlin; Heidelberg: Springer), 18–25.
Ramage, D., Hall, D., Nallapati, R., and Manning, C. D. (2009). “Labeled LDA:
a supervised topic model for credit attribution in multi-labeled corpora,” in
Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: Volume 1. (Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational
Linguistics), 248–256. doi: 10.3115/1699510.1699543
Roberts, M. E., Stewart, B. M., Tingley, D., Lucas, C., Leder-Luis, J., Gadarian, S.
K., et al. (2014). Structural topic models for open-ended survey responses. Am.
J. Pol. Sci. 58, 1064–1082. doi: 10.1111/ajps.12103
Rothman, K. J., Lanes, S., and Sacks, S. T. (2004). The reporting odds ratio and
its advantages over the proportional reporting ratio. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug
Saf. 13, 519–523. doi: 10.1002/pds.1001
Roux, E., Thiessard, F., Fourrier, A., Begaud, B., and Tubert-Bitter, P. (2005).
Evaluation of statistical association measures for the automatic signal
generation in pharmacovigilance. IEEE Trans. Inform. Technol. Biomed. 9,
518–527. doi: 10.1109/TITB.2005.855566A
Salton, G., and McGill, M. J. (1986). Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval.
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Sarker, A., Ginn, R., Nikfarjam, A., O’Connor, K., Smith, K., Jayaraman, S., et al.
(2015). Utilizing social media data for pharmacovigilance: A review. J. Biomed.
Inform. 54, 202–212. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.02.004
Sloane, R., Osanlou, O., Lewis, D., Bollegala, D., Maskell, S., and Pirmohamed, M.
(2015). Social media and pharmacovigilance: a review of the opportunities and
challenges. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 80, 910–920. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12717
Stevens, K., Kegelmeyer, P., Andrzejewski, D., and Buttler, D. (2012). “Exploring
topic coherence over many models and many topics,” in Proceedings of the 2012

16

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

Chen et al.

Mining Social Media for Pharmacovigilance

Yates, A., Goharian, N., and Frieder, O. (2015). “Extracting adverse drug reactions
from social media,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (Austin, TX: AAAI Press), 2460–2467. Available online at:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2886521.2886663
Yeleswarapu, S., Rao, A., Joseph, T., Saipradeep, V. G., and Srinivasan,
R. (2014). A pipeline to extract drug-adverse event pairs from multiple
data sources. BMC Med. Inform. Decis. Mak. 14:13. doi: 10.1186/1472-69
47-14-13
Yesha, R., and Gangopadhyay, A. (2015). “A method for analyzing health
behavior in online forums,” in Proceedings of the 6th ACM Conference on
Bioinformatics, Computational Biology and Health Informatics (New York, NY:
ACM), 615–621.
Zhan, Y., Liu, R., Li, Q., Leischow, S. J., and Zeng, D. D. (2017).
Identifying topics for E-cigarette user-generated contents: a case study from
multiple social media platforms. J. Med. Internet Res. 19:e24. doi: 10.2196/
jmir.5780

Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and
Computational Natural Language Learning (Association for Computational
Linguistics), 952–961.
Taddy, M. (2012). “On estimation and selection for topic models,” in Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, 1184–1193. Available online at: http://proceedings.
mlr.press/v22/taddy12.html
Tapi Nzali, M. D., Bringay, S., Lavergne, C., Mollevi, C., and Opitz, T. (2017). What
patients can tell us: topic analysis for social media on breast cancer. JMIR Med.
Inform. 5:e23. doi: 10.2196/medinform.7779
van Puijenbroek, E. P., Bate, A., Leufkens, H. G. M., Lindquist, M., Orre, R., and
Egberts, A. C. G. (2002). A comparison of measures of disproportionality for
signal detection in spontaneous reporting systems for adverse drug reactions.
Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 11, 3–10. doi: 10.1002/pds.668
Wang, X., Hripcsak, G., Markatou, M., and Friedman, C. (2009). Active
computerized pharmacovigilance using natural language processing, statistics,
and electronic health records: a feasibility study. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 16,
328–337. doi: 10.1197/jamia.M3028
Wang, Y.-C., Kraut, R., and Levine, J. M. (2012). “To stay or leave?: the relationship
of emotional and informational support to commitment in online health
support groups,” in Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (New York, NY: ACM), 833–842.
Wei, C.-H., Peng, Y., Leaman, R., Davis, A. P., Mattingly, C. J., Li, J., et al. (2016).
Assessing the state of the art in biomedical relation extraction: overview of the
BioCreative V chemical-disease relation (CDR) task. Database 2016, 154–166.
doi: 10.1093/database/baw032
Weyandt, L. L., Oster, D. R., Marraccini, M. E., Gudmundsdottir, B. G., Munro,
B. A., Rathkey, E. S., et al. (2016). Prescription stimulant medication misuse:
where are we and where do we go from here? Exp. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 24,
400–414. doi: 10.1037/pha0000093
World Health Organization (1972). International drug monitoring: the role of
national centres. Report of a WHO meeting. World Health Organ. Tech. Rep.
Ser. 498, 1–25.
Yang, M., Kiang, M., and Shang, W. (2015). Filtering big data from social media –
building an early warning system for adverse drug reactions. J. Biomed. Inform.
54, 230–240. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.01.011

Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org

Conflict of Interest Statement: The Vidal drug database is owned by the Vidal
Company, which employs SP. The Luxid Annotation server and the Skill Cartridge
are owned by the Expert System Company, which employs CH. Kappa Santé, the
company that developed the Detec’t tool, employs CF, PF, SS, and NT.
The other authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Chen, Faviez, Schuck, Lillo-Le-Louët, Texier, Dahamna, Huot,
Foulquié, Pereira, Leroux, Karapetiantz, Guenegou-Arnoux, Katsahian, Bousquet
and Burgun. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s)
and the copyright owner are credited and that the original publication in
this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.

17

May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 541

