Drug Information

Text Analytics for Surveillance (TAS):
An Interactive Environment for
Safety Literature Review

Drug Information Journal
46(1) 115-123
ª The Author(s) 2012
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0092861511428890
http://dij.sagepub.com

Camilla Christensson, PhD1, Geoffrey Gipson, PhD2,
Tracey Thomas3, and James Weatherall, PhD4

Abstract
Pharmacovigilance regulations and guidelines state that literature databases should be searched at least monthly to detect safety
signals from the published literature. In addition, periodic safety update reports (PSURs) should contain a summary and references
from reports in the literature containing important safety findings. The volume of literature that needs to be reviewed is high,
making manual review of the abstracts a resource-intensive process. Text Analytics for Surveillance (TAS) was developed as a
software tool to improve the efficiency and consistency of the routine literature evaluation, tracking, and documentation process
within a regulated pharmaceutical environment. Text Analytics for Surveillance uses natural language processing and includes a
novel application of text analytics to assist with identifying the most relevant articles in the process of scheduled surveillance
of published literature by enhancing categorized review, introducing consistency of approach, ensuring rigorous recording of
activities, and aiding profile analysis. There are clear opportunities to reuse the TAS approach within other scientific and business
areas where regular literature evaluation is important.
Keywords
text analytics; safety surveillance; natural language processing; literature

Introduction
Pharmaceutical companies are required to adhere to pharmacovigilance regulations and guidelines. Specific to detecting
safety signals from the published literature, these guidelines
state that at least 2 internationally recognized literature
databases should be searched at least monthly.1 In addition,
periodic safety update reports (PSURs) should contain a summary and references from reports in the scientific and medical
literature, including relevant published abstracts from
meetings, containing important positive or negative safety
findings.2,3
The AstraZeneca process for detecting safety signals from
the published literature complies with these pharmacovigilance
guidelines. The process requires that the published scientific
and medical literature must be assessed on a regular basis. For
this purpose, a product safety search strategy is developed and
used to guide the creation of a literature database query. This
query is automatically executed on a regular basis, and surveillance teams receive an e-mail containing relevant article lists
(bulletins) that they are responsible for reviewing. If an abstract

indicates a potential safety signal, the full text of the article is
reviewed and appropriate action is taken, such as a full evaluation of the safety topic using data from other sources. The volume of literature that needs to be reviewed for marketed
products is high (ranging from 10 to more than 200 articles per
month), making manual review of the abstracts a resourceintensive process. The requirement to review this volume of
abstracts may introduce the risk of missing important publications because of ‘‘volume overload.’’ In addition, it is important

1

Patient Safety Surveillance, AstraZeneca R&D, Lund, Sweden
Safety Informatics, Patient Safety, AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP,
Wilmington, DE, USA
3
Patient Safety Surveillance, AstraZeneca R&D, Charnwood, UK
4
Biomedical Informatics, AstraZeneca R&D, Alderley Park, UK
2

Submitted 23-Sep-2011; accepted 03-Oct-2011.
Corresponding Author:
James Weatherall, Biomedical Informatics, AstraZeneca R&D, Parklands,
Alderley Park, Macclesfield, Cheshire, SK10 4TG, UK
(e-mail: james.weatherall@astrazeneca.com).

116
that surveillance teams are able to document and track articles
that they have identified as requiring inclusion in PSURs. In the
past, various methods for documenting and tracking articles
have been used, including spreadsheets, meeting minutes, and
an in-house signal management system.
Natural language processing (NLP) is a computerized
approach to analyzing textual information, such as that contained within published documents. The goal is usually to automate parts of the text processing that ordinarily would be
performed by a human. When the overarching goal is to transform text into data that can be subjected to analytical methods,
the term text analytics is often used. The techniques and tools
associated with NLP and text analytics have been successfully
used in a number of varied business applications, including
sentiment analysis around products,4 screening of intelligence
for national security,5 and scientific discovery within the life
sciences.6 Natural language processing has also been used for
pharmacovigilance purposes.7,8
To improve the efficiency and consistency of the routine literature evaluation, tracking, and documentation processes
within a regulated pharmaceutical environment, the application
of NLP and text analytics technologies was investigated. The
results of that investigation and a detailed description of the
system design and implementation are presented below.

System Description
Text Analytics for Surveillance (TAS) was developed to be a
unifying system for product safety literature review in a global
pharmaceutical company. It is a software tool that is accessible
to specific users via the company intranet and creates a collaborative work environment for a large group of scientists. In
addition, the system provides a novel application of text analytics to assist with identifying the most relevant articles in the
process of scheduled surveillance of published literature.

Links Between TAS and Other Systems
The safety database provides a feed of the latest productspecific adverse event terms for each product on which surveillance is being conducted. Text Analytics for Surveillance
updates its own copies of these lists via the safety database,
once per week. The updates occur via a scheduled task, run
over the weekend when TAS usage is at a minimum.
The vocabulary server is used by TAS as a dictionary service for disease and drug terms. It uses the Medical Dictionary
for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) for the disease terms. For
instance, when a MedDRA preferred term (PT) is received
from the safety database, the vocabulary server is queried to
retrieve all the related lowest level terms (LLTs) for that PT.
This ensures that TAS has a complete description of the term.
Similarly, when a new drug is added to TAS, the vocabulary

Drug Information Journal 46(1)

Figure 1 Dependencies between Text Analytics for Surveillance
(TAS) and other systems. The safety database, data transmission
component, and the vocabulary server are within the AstraZeneca
firewall, whereas the libraries of medical literature and meetings
abstracts are external. Rectangles represent entities that store information; ovals represent entities that only transmit information.

server is queried to retrieve all alternative names for the drug,
such as a list of generic and brand names.
The literature abstracts are imported into TAS on request. A
query for a particular product is sent to the external medical literature database, and a feed of literature abstracts is returned to
TAS for processing. Conference and meeting abstracts are
added semi-automatically to TAS. To import an individual
abstract, the user pastes the link into TAS. To import multiple
abstracts, the user navigates to the meeting abstracts Web site
and uses a special TAS plug-in to select and import the meeting
abstracts he or she requires.
Figure 1 illustrates the dependencies between TAS and other
systems, both inside and outside the AstraZeneca firewall.

Article Processing
For each article that is loaded into TAS, regardless of source,
the following steps are followed:
1. Extract abstract and keywords text for article.
2. Parse text character by character, serially.
3. Identify tokens, based on parsing step, and according to a
predefined set of delimiters (eg, space, full-stop, comma,
parentheses).
4. Match terms, within and across tokens, based on predefined TAS categories. Both product-specific (Keep Under
Review [KUR], Listed) and general categories (eg, Pregnancy & Lactation) are used. See Table 1 for a full list
of the TAS category definitions.
5. Forbid matches, where (i) the match is less than 3 characters, (ii) the match has nondelimiting characters both
immediately before and immediately after it, and (iii) a
stop-word has been implemented. See the Feedback and

Christensson et al

117

Table 1 Definition of the Categories Each Article May Be Mapped Into
Category

Abbreviation

Description

Designated Medical Event

DME

A predefined list of adverse event terms that AstraZeneca
considers to represent clinical circumstances that are
generally rare in occurrence, are usually medically
significant, and often carry a high index of suspicion of an
underlying drug-related etiology when they do occur

Keep Under Review

KUR

Product-specific medical events of special interest

Listed

L

Product-specific side effects listed in the summary of
product characteristics

Adverse Event

AE

Includes articles indexed in the medical literature database
as describing an adverse event in association with the
AstraZeneca product

Periodic safety update report sections

LoE
O
P&L
ME
F
Int
A&M
Chi
Eld
Ren
Hep
LT

Lack of effect
Overdose
Pregnancy and lactation
Medication error
Fatal
Interactions
Abuse and misuse
Children
Elderly
Renal impairment
Hepatic impairment
Long-term therapy

6.
7.
8.

Tuning section for an explanation of the stop-word
functionality.
Assign article categories, based on the allowed term
matches.
Store extracted text, along with assigned categorization
and term matches.
Extract and store additional article metadata: article title,
document type (eg, article, review, meeting abstract), link
to full text, and citation details.

Dynamics of the TAS User Interface
Once the bulletin of references has been imported, the user
reviews them in the TAS tool. For each article in TAS, there
are different pieces of information presented (Figure 2). The
citation information includes title, authors, journal, publication
year, volume, issue, and pages. The abstracts and lists of keywords are truncated in the article list view, but they can be
viewed in full by clicking on the text ‘‘More’’ at the end of each
truncated abstract/list of keywords. Additional information,
such as document type (eg, article, review, conference abstract,
note, short survey) is also presented.
To facilitate the review of the references, each article may
be mapped into 16 different categories (Table 1). For most
terms, the PTs in MedDRA are used. However, authors might
use other wordings in their articles. Therefore, there is a list

of synonyms, including MedDRA LLTs and general terms, for
each category or term (exemplified in Table 2). The ‘‘Summary’’ function allows users to view a categorized overview
of term matches for that article (Figure 2). To see in which context the terms are mentioned in the article, users can right-click
the category box. The terms are then highlighted in blue.
Users may prioritize their review of articles by filtering
according to specific categories. For example, a user may wish
to review articles containing KUR terms first by left-clicking
on the KUR category. Only articles containing KUR terms are
displayed for the user to review. The user can filter by several
categories at once.
It is possible to access the full text of each article by clicking
on the title of the article in TAS. If AstraZeneca has a subscription to the journal, the user may access the full text electronically; otherwise, the user is taken directly to the in-house
tool for ordering articles.
As users review the articles, they have the option of adding a
tag to each article such as ‘‘No action’’ or ‘‘For consideration in
relevant document or meeting.’’
If there are a large number of articles in a bulletin, there is
the ability to apply a bookmark either for the user himself or
herself or for everyone assigned to that particular product, to
mark where they are in the review. The next time the user
accesses the bulletin, he or she will be taken straight to the
article that has the bookmark.

118

Drug Information Journal 46(1)

Figure 2 Information presented for each article in Text Analytics for Surveillance (TAS). The citation information includes title, authors, journal,
publication year, volume, issue, pages, abstracts, and lists of keywords. The full abstract or the full list of keywords is displayed by clicking on the
text ‘‘(More . . .)’’ at the end of the truncated abstract or list of keywords. Each article may be mapped into 16 different categories. A categorized
overview of term matches for a particular article can be accessed by clicking on ‘‘Summary,’’ as shown in figure.

Christensson et al
Table 2 List of Synonyms for the Category ‘‘Lack of Effect’’
Drug effect decreased
Drug effect delayed
Drug half-life reduced
Drug ineffective
Drug level decreased
Drug resistance
Drug-specific antibody present
Drug tolerance
Ineffective
Lack of drug effect
Lack of effect
Lack of efficacy
No drug effect
No effect
No efficacy
No therapeutic response
Not efficacious
Refractory
Tachyphylaxis
Therapeutic product ineffective
Therapeutic reaction time decreased
Therapeutic response decreased
Therapeutic response delayed
Treatment failure
Vaccination failure

Once the user has reviewed the bulletin, he or she clicks on
‘‘Sign Off.’’ The name of the user who signed off the bulletin
and the time of sign-off are recorded in the TAS tool, thus documenting that literature review has taken place.

Profile Analysis
The article categorization provided by TAS is used to explore
trends in the profile of a product over time. The 1D profile analysis feature is displayed as a bar chart, where each bar represents a category. The height of the bars is proportional to the
number of articles within that category, for the chosen product,
within a user-specified period. To facilitate further investigation, links allow the user to view all the articles contributing
to a particular bar in the chart.
The 2D profile analysis feature is visualized as a matrixstyle heatmap (Figure 3). The full set of TAS categories is represented on both the horizontal and the vertical axes of the
matrix. The number in each matrix cell is the number of articles
that fall into both categories to which that cell belongs. The
heat of each cell represents the statistical significance of each
finding. The closer the color is to red (and furthest away from
gray), the more statistically significant is this particular number
of category co-occurrences. The measure chosen here to calculate the co-occurrence significance is the pointwise mutual
information (PMI) score, which is used widely in information

119
retrieval theory to establish the statistical significance of a pair
of outcomes9:
PMIðx; yÞ ¼ logðpðx; yÞ=pðxÞpðyÞÞ;
where p(x,y) is the fraction of articles falling into both category
x and category y, p(x) is the fraction of articles falling into category x, and p(y) is the fraction of articles falling into category
y. The PMI score has the following notable properties:
 If categories x and y are completely independent, PMI ¼ 0.
 If categories x and y are completely associated, PMI ¼
–log(p(x)) ¼ –log(p(y))—that is, it cannot be negative.
 PMI values that are greater than zero are potentially interesting; the larger the value, the more potentially interesting
the correlation.
Users can select a cell in the heatmap to display a breakdown of the terms that occur most frequently in the selected
category co-occurrence. Furthermore, it is possible to display
a list of the articles that are the major contributors to a category
co-occurrence, also by term frequency.

Ad Hoc Search
The standard workflow allows access to fixed groups of articles
via their association with specific product literature bulletins.
However, it is also possible to perform complex, multicriteria
searches on all the articles within TAS. The ad hoc search permits any combination of the following: product, date range,
free text (title, abstract, and keywords), category, term, tag, and
document type. The search function includes standard complex
additions such as wildcard, phrase-based, and Boolean text
searches using AND, OR, and NOT.

User Access and System Security
There are 3 classes of users: super users, product-specific users,
and read-only users. The super users, or administrators, manage
other users, products, and term lists. In the TAS tool, safety surveillance teams are assigned to the products that they are
responsible for and are then able to view all references and
load, tag, and sign off references for their own products. Surveillance teams have read-only access to references for all
products that they are not assigned to in the tool.

Feedback and Tuning
Text Analytics for Surveillance includes the facility for users to
log feedback when they observe an issue with the term matching for a given article—usually this will be a false positive or a
false negative. In this context, a false positive is an identified
match when there should have been none. For instance, renal
insufficiency causes a match to occur because it is a substring

120

Drug Information Journal 46(1)

Figure 3 An example of the 2D profile heatmap feature, which shows article level co-occurrences of Text Analytics for Surveillance (TAS) term
categories. The numeric values indicate the number of co-occurrences, and the shading of the squares indicates significance as given by the
pointwise mutual information (PMI) metric, with squares transitioning from gray to red (colors shown in the online version of this article) as
statistical significance increases.

of adrenal insufficiency. A false negative, on the other hand, is
the absence of a match when one was expected. For instance,
one may have expected the text 9-year-old girl to have caused
the article to be categorized as ‘‘Children.’’ However, this
match would be missed if girl was not included in the TAS dictionaries as a synonym for children. The TAS interface allows
both types of issues to be reported.
These feedback mechanisms are critical for system evolution. They allow TAS to be continuously tuned to become ever
more accurate at term matching and therefore article categorization. An administrator’s interface displays user-reported
issues that are pending. A TAS administrator can handle each
issue via a number of options:

above-mentioned features. In addition, as a formal measure of
the realized system benefits, quantitative and qualitative data
have been collected and evaluated at various times during the
project. During the system development phase, the performance
of article categorization with TAS was evaluated using a set of
manually categorized gold-standard articles. Following the rollout of TAS, system usage statistics and user feedback were collected and evaluated with the aim of gaining insight into the
uptake and perception of the tool. Because use of TAS is voluntary, these data are considered indicative of the value added by
the tool. The findings of these evaluations are presented below.



Clearly, the power of an informatics approach such as TAS
relies on the accuracy with which it can match terms within
article abstracts and keywords and thus apply categorization
to articles. However, in this case, it is difficult to determine
such metrics because initial benchmarking of ‘‘accuracy’’ must
be relative to some absolute measure—that is, a baseline for
what is the ‘‘perfect’’ categorization for an article or set of articles. We find that in reality, there is no such ideal categorization. Thus, the best we can do is benchmark the TAS
approach against human categorizers, even though we know
that intercategorizer concordance is not 100%.
The benchmarking approach involved manual categorization of 300 articles. For each article, the title, abstract, and
keywords were available. There were 100 articles from each
of 3 marketed products, and each product was categorized by
a different human curator. The same articles were then







Consult with other administrators, as well as the user who
reported the issue.
Disable a particular term synonym, so that it is never
matched again.
Add a new synonym for a term.
Add a ‘‘stop-word’’ so that a specific match is forbidden.
For instance, itching is a perfectly valid term to match, but
there needs to be a way to prevent a match when it is recognized purely because it is a substring of switching. Therefore, a rule that forbids only this combination can be added.
Dismiss the issue if no action is to be taken.

The inclusion of user feedback mechanisms in the system
reflects the recognized importance of building a flexible system
capable of continuous improvement. This philosophy was
embedded early in the project and is carried forward through the

Baseline Accuracy Testing

Christensson et al

121

Table 3 The Baseline Text Analytics for Surveillance Term Category
Assignment Performance for Each of 3 Separate AstraZeneca
Products, Over 2 Initial Iterative Rounds of Performance Tuning

Table 4 Some Illustrative Usage Statistics Based on Global Usage of
Text Analytics for Surveillance Within AstraZeneca (as of December
1, 2010)

Product

Products
Number of products with 1 bulletin
90
Number of products with 5 bulletins
71
Users
Number of users assigned to a product with 1 bulletin 103
Bulletins
Total number of bulletins
1100
Total number of ‘‘signed-off’’ bulletins
1039
Articles
Total number of articles
25,712
Number of articles with a user-assigned tag
14,555

A
B
C
A
B
C

Round

Recall

Precision

1
1
1
2
2
2

65.98
73.91
64.80
71.13
80.12
87.76

64.65
66.48
74.71
66.03
60.28
81.52

If TP, FP, and FN are respectively the number of true positives, false positives,
and false negatives, Recall ¼ TP/(TP þ FN), and Precision ¼ TP/(TP þ FP).

passed through the TAS automated categorization process,
and the 2 sets of categorizations were compared. After the
first round of comparisons, updates were made to the TAS
dictionaries and matching rules to improve the falsepositive and false-negative rates. Then the TAS categorization was rerun and the comparison was repeated. The results
from this process are shown in Table 3, where the precision
and recall are reported at the category level. The most important single performance measure for TAS is recall because
the goal is to help minimize the risk of overlooking relevant
publications. In this context, recall refers to the percentage of
human-assigned categorizations that were also assigned by
TAS. Note that no articles are excluded from review if they
are not recalled, but rather they lack 1 or more of the categorization annotations that the human reviewers expected.
As the results show, the initial tuning of TAS was performed
primarily in favor of recall. Note that resource constraints
limited the volume of hand-curated literature available during
the TAS testing phase, and consequently it was decided not
to split that data into separate training and validation
sets in this instance. However, this was not a critical limitation for TAS accuracy because the comparison with humancurated literature was only a guide for baseline accuracy
tuning, and we subsequently relied on the continuous
improvement capabilities of TAS for further incremental
improvements in categorization accuracy (see Feedback and
Tuning section).

Usage Statistics
It is often informative to measure the success of a new technology via its uptake, based on the assumption that if users truly
believe it will help them, then they will use it. Note that use
of TAS within AstraZeneca is not mandatory. Table 4 shows
some illustrative usage statistics based on global usage of TAS
within AstraZeneca (as of December 1, 2010).

Feedback From TAS Users on the Tool
Users of the TAS tool have provided feedback on the tool as
detailed below:
 Improvement in efficiency: time saving associated with using
the tool, compared with manually reviewing the abstracts,
ranged from 0.5 to 4 hours (per month). Three users found
that use of the TAS tool was not associated with any time
saving.
 Prioritization of evaluation of articles: users reported that,
using the tool, they could see articles are of interest very
quickly thanks to categorization of articles and color coding
of relevant terms.
 Documenting evaluation of the literature: using the tool,
users found it easy to see which articles had been
reviewed and when and by whom the articles had been
reviewed.
 Tracking articles of interest: users liked the facility to
put comments next to each article, allowing a search
to be conducted on these comments later. This ability
to track publications is very useful when preparing
PSURs or other internal or external safety documents
as it allows rapid retrieval of publications identified during the monthly literature review.

Discussion
The TAS approach to conducting safety surveillance of the
published literature is associated with several benefits, including the following:
 Ability to prioritize review of published articles by category on a product-specific basis
 Time saving compared with reviewing abstracts manually
 Ability to document in the tool that review of the literature
has taken place on an ongoing basis

122




Drug Information Journal 46(1)
Ability to track publications of interest received over time,
which may need to be included in PSURs or for other internal or external safety review purposes
Abstracts are archived in the tool so they can be retrieved at
a later date

Text Analytics for Surveillance was designed, developed,
and deployed as a fit-for-purpose tool and approach, aimed at
a specific business process. This targeted design and controlled
scope lend the tool its unique impact and value while also identifying areas where complementary requirements exist. For
instance, it should be noted that TAS yields the greatest benefits when a single product has 10s or 100s of articles per month
and therefore where the volume of articles to review can be an
issue. For lower numbers of articles, an alternative, more manual solution may be perfectly acceptable. Moreover, TAS does
not replace the type of literature review or text-mining activities, which are flexibly deployed in response to specific scientific or business questions around a pharmaceutical product.
Furthermore, the approach described here appears to build
on and complement recent published work on the application
of NLP and text analytics to pharmacovigilance. The overall
TAS approach is similar to that used in an example of the burgeoning field of NLP applied to electronic health records7 but
is applied to a different textual source: published literature and
meeting abstracts. This is key, as textual analysis often calls for
different technologies, algorithms, and tuning, depending on
the ultimate source of the data. The use of hierarchical termbased literature search can improve recall8 via individual
searches on PubMed. This is an important result, and TAS
extends the concept by developing an automated, online environment for performing such literature classification and
review on a continuous basis.
Finally, there are clearly opportunities to reuse the TAS
approach within other scientific and business areas where regular literature evaluation is important:
1.

2.

Internal documentation. In large organizations, such as
global pharmaceutical companies, huge volumes of scientific reports and related outputs are generated and archived
on a continuous basis. Often it can be difficult or impossible to mine the text within these documents. Text analytics
opens up the possibility to recognize high-level trends or
otherwise form new hypotheses based on latent information contained in the text.
Commercial intelligence. To keep abreast of the latest
developments in the pharmaceutical sector, it is necessary
to regularly scan external textual information sources such
as online press releases, blogs, and newsgroups. The need
to react quickly to new information on competitors is often
not adequately met by only using manual scanning or

curation techniques. Text analytics can provide automation
to parts of this process, thus permitting a more rapid assimilation of the online information.
In conclusion, semi-automation of the routine literature surveillance process using NLP and text analytics can enhance
categorized review, introduce consistency of approach, ensure
rigorous recording of activities, and aid profile analysis.

Conclusions
Text Analytics for Surveillance was developed as a software
tool to improve the efficiency and consistency of the routine literature evaluation, tracking, and documentation process within
a regulated pharmaceutical environment. It uses natural language processing and text analytics to enhance categorized
review, introduce consistency of approach, ensure rigorous
recording of activities, and aid profile analysis. Text Analytics
for Surveillance yields the greatest benefits when a single product has 10s or 100s of articles per month and therefore where
the volume of articles to review can be an issue. There are clear
opportunities to reuse the TAS approach within other scientific
and business areas where regular literature evaluation is
important.
Acknowledgments
We thank Phil Jenkins, Ekaterina Koledova, James Milligan, Julie
Mitchell, and Anders Ottosson for being part of the team developing
the prototype and TAS, as well as Antoni Wisniewski and Magnus
Ysander for their expert input.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for
the research and/or authorship of this article: AstraZeneca sponsored
the research contained in this article.

References
1. Current Challenges in Pharmacovigilance: Pragmatic
Approaches: Report of CIOMS Working Group V. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2001.
2. Volume 9A of the Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union. September 2008. http://ec.europa.eu/health/files/
eudralex/vol-9/pdf/vol9a_09-2008_en.pdf
3. International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. ICH
Harmonised Tripartite Guideline, Clinical Safety Data Management: Periodic Safety Update Reports for Marketed Drugs
E2C(R1). Parent Guideline, November 6, 1996; Addendum,

Christensson et al
February 6, 2003. http://www.ich.org/fileadmin/Public_Web_Site/
ICH_Products/Guidelines/Efficacy/E2C/Step4/E2C_R1__Guideline.pdf
4. Dey L, Haque SKM. Opinion mining from noisy text data. In
Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Analytics for Noisy
Unstructured Text Data (AND ’08). New York: ACM; 2008:
83–90.
5. Zanasi A. Virtual weapons for real wars: text mining for national
security. In: Corchado E, Zunino R, Gastaldo P, Herrero A, eds.
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Computational
Intelligence in Security for Information Systems CISIS 2008. Vol
53. New York: Springer; 2009:53–60.

123
6. Juhl Jensen L, Saric J, Bork P. Literature mining for the biologist:
from information retrieval to biological discovery. Nat Rev Genet.
2006;7(2):119–129.
7. Wang X, Hripcsak G, Markatou M, Friedman C. Active computerized pharmacovigilance using natural language processing, statistics, and electronic health records: a feasibility study. J Am Med
Inform Assoc. 2009;16(3):328–337.
8. Delamarre D, Lillo-Le Louet A, Guillot L, et al. Documentation in
pharmacovigilance: using an ontology to extend and normalize
Pubmed queries. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2010;160:518–522.
9. Church KW, Hanks P. Word association norms, mutual information, and lexicography. Comput Linguist. 1990;16(1):22–29.

