articles

nature publishing group

Biclustering of Adverse Drug Events in the FDA’s
Spontaneous Reporting System
R Harpaz1, H Perez1, HS Chase1, R Rabadan1, G Hripcsak1 and C Friedman1
In this article, we present a new pharmacovigilance data mining technique based on the biclustering paradigm, which
is designed to identify drug groups that share a common set of adverse events (AEs) in the spontaneous reporting
system (SRS) of the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). A taxonomy of biclusters is developed, revealing that a
significant number of bona fide adverse drug event (ADE) biclusters have been identified. Statistical tests indicate that
it is extremely unlikely that the bicluster structures thus discovered, as well as their content, could have arisen by mere
chance. Some of the biclusters classified as indeterminate provide support for previously unrecognized and potentially
novel ADEs. In addition, we demonstrate the potential importance of the proposed methodology in several important
aspects of pharmacovigilance such as providing insight into the etiology of ADEs, facilitating the identification of novel
ADEs, suggesting methods and a rationale for aggregating terminologies, highlighting areas of focus, and providing
an exploratory tool for data mining.
Despite the methodological rigor of clinical trials, it is generally
not possible to identify all safety issues associated with drugs
during the premarketing research phase. This is primarily due
to the fact that the size and characteristics of the subject population, drug doses, duration of use, and concomitant therapies that
exist in actual postmarketing reality cannot be exactly mirrored
in a clinical trial.1 The impact of adverse drug events (ADEs)
results in significant social costs estimated at several billion
dollars annually as well as in unintended, and sometimes fatal,
harm to patients.2,3
Spontaneous reporting systems (SRSs) are database resources
encompassing voluntary reports of suspected ADEs. The availability of real-world data from SRSs provides a rich opportunity
to detect novel postmarketing ADEs because they include populations that are not well represented in clinical trials. Among the
major SRSs is the Adverse Event Reporting System (AERS) of
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).4
SRSs typically receive tens of thousands of reports each year,
amounting to millions of reports in each SRS. Challenged by
the vast size and complexity of the SRS, the traditional approach
of manual case-by-case review has been complemented by
more efficient methods consisting of automated and quantitative approaches that are commonly referred to as data mining
algorithms (DMAs). DMAs are generally designed to identify
statistical associations between drugs and adverse events (AEs).
These statistical associations, also referred to as signals, are not

necessarily true ADEs but rather hypotheses that warrant further
investigation to qualify them as credible ADEs. They allow evaluators to peruse the large volume of reports and focus their attention on potentially important safety issues, while ­avoiding—to
the extent possible—false alerts and missed signals.
Over the years, a wide range of DMAs have been developed
to screen potential ADEs.5–7 Most DMAs rely on the use of disproportionality measures that attempt to quantify the degree of
“unexpectedness” of a drug–AE association.8 Typically, a predefined disproportionality threshold is used to screen potential ADEs for further review. The Gamma Poisson Shrinker
(GPS),9 used in this work, is a DMA endorsed by the FDA10 that
attempts to account for the uncertainty in a disproportionality
measure associated with small samples. Given that the reporting
of AEs to the SRS is voluntary, DMAs are limited primarily by
data-quality issues1,8,11 such as duplication of reports, missing
data, typographical errors, inaccuracy of reporting, variation in
granularity and terminology used, underreporting, and media
influences.
Most DMAs in current use focus on the detection of potential
ADEs involving a single drug and a single AE only, excluding
other ADEs. To the best of our knowledge, no studies have considered the type of drug–AE clustering proposed in this paper.
Recent work by Bate et al. suggests that “a single drug–AE
­combination should not be considered in isolation, but combinations of other AEs with that drug (especially similar terms) and

1Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York, USA. Correspondence: R Harpaz (rave.harpaz@dbmi.columbia.edu)

Received 24 August 2010; accepted 29 October 2010; advance online publication 29 December 2010. doi:10.1038/clpt.2010.285
Clinical pharmacology & Therapeutics | VOLUME 89 NUMBER 2 | february 2011

243

articles
other drugs (especially from the same therapeutic group) with
the same AE should be considered.”8 The clustering approach
presented in this article provides a structured approach for identifying and describing ADEs and their relationship with other
ADEs and with drug families. Examining the similarity of drugs
and AEs within a cluster should provide valuable insight into
the etiology of ADEs, help validate empirical evidence for AEs,
and assist in the identification of novel ADEs. Additionally, drug
classes identified by clustering can be used to predict potential
ADEs for new drugs with similar active ingredients or molecular
structure on the basis of their affiliation to known drug classes,
an advantage recognized in a recent study by Fliri et al.12
Although its importance has been acknowledged by the
FDA,13 the role of exploratory analysis and visualization of data
in the context of pharmacovigilance is often undervalued and
overlooked. In the same article, the FDA suggests that one of the
goals should be “to both describe the database in a big-picture
manner and to be able to proceed from this big picture down to
the particulars…that would facilitate medical understanding
and insight into drug–event associations in the database.” The
proposed clustering approach provides a natural way to explore
and visualize the large space, complex structure, and content of
SRSs. Additionally, clustering can be used to detect data anomalies and highlight other data-quality issues existing in SRSs.
Given that SRSs rely heavily on drug naming and AE termino­
logy, the success of DMAs may depend on the grouping of similar
drugs that appear under different names and AEs that are pathophysiologically related.14 Bate et al.8 assert that “terminology
and clustering of related terms is crucial in signal detection, so
­better methods of clustering are required.” The proposed clustering approach has the ability to automatically suggest grouping of
potentially similar terms, which may increase the signal strength
of ADE associations that would otherwise go undetected.
Biclustering is a relatively new clustering technique designed
to identify clusters in sparse high-dimensional data sets by
simultaneously clustering both observations (drugs) and variables (AEs).15,16 Typical SRSs contain thousands of drugs and
thousands of AEs, thereby creating a clustering space of several
thousand dimensions, which appears to be well-suited for the
application of biclustering. In this context, a bicluster is defined
as a small set of drugs, each of which is associated with the same
small set of AEs (Figure 1).
The objective of this article is to describe a novel pharmaco­
vigilance data mining technique designed to identify drug groups
that share a common set of AEs, with which potential ADEs are
analyzed and previously unrecognized ADEs may be identified.
The method is based on the biclustering paradigm and is applied
to individual reports from the 2008 FDA AERS. The overall
mining process consists of six steps, depicted in Figure 2: (i) to
reduce drug naming redundancy and strengthen the signal, drug
names are mapped to their corresponding generic names; (ii) to
reduce the number of spurious associations, duplicate reports
are identified and removed; (iii) to mitigate confounding, data
stratification by age, gender, and year is performed; (iv) to obtain
ADE association strengths, disproportionality analysis using the
GPS approach is performed; (v) on the basis of the association
244

Adverse events
Drugs
Suicidal ideation
Varenicline
Mental impairment
Oxycodone
Euphoric mood
Coricidin HBP
Major depression

Figure 1 An adverse drug event bicluster can be visualized as a complete
bipartite graph in which the set of nodes on the left corresponds to drugs
and the set of nodes on the right corresponds to adverse events. An edge
represents a statistical association between a drug and an adverse event.
By definition, each drug must be associated with each adverse event in the
bicluster, thereby rendering a complete graph. In this example, the drugs
varenicline, oxycodone, and coricidin HBP were all found to be statistically
associated with the adverse events suicidal ideation, mental impairment,
euphoric mood, and major depression.

AERS 2008
MedLEE
Drug mapping to
generics
RXNORM
Duplicate reports
removal

Stratification

GPS association
analysis

Biclustering

Clustering
evaluation

Figure 2 The data analysis and clustering process. AERS, Adverse Event
Reporting System; GPS, Gamma Poisson Shrinker.

strengths computed in the previous step, biclustering of drugs and
AEs is performed; and (vi) a qualitative and quantitative evaluation of clustering results is undertaken. In contrast to current
approaches, a set of study drugs or ADEs is not selected prior to
mining; rather, our approach is to allow all the data to participate
in the mining without any restrictions or prior assumptions.
Results
Data collection and statistics

The overall data collection process of reports from the 2008
AERS resulted in 441,009 individual reports, 65,975 unique
drugs, and 10,886 unique AEs. Approximately 66% of the original set of unique drugs were recognized and mapped to generics,
reducing the number of unique drugs to 28,341. The number of
duplicate reports identified was 22,420.
VOLUME 89 NUMBER 2 | february 2011 | www.nature.com/cpt

articles
Association statistics

Bicluster statistics

The GPS empirical Bayesian geometric mean (EBGM) measure
of association was computed for 328,574 drug–AE combinations
that had an incidence rate >0. Of 308,520,126 (28,341 drugs ×
10,886 AEs) possible drug–AE combinations, over 99% of the
cells in the data matrix were empty. The mean and median of
the EBGM measures were 12.9 and 3.2, respectively, slightly
larger than those reported in similar studies; 9 however, this
finding is to be expected because only drugs that were reported
as being the primary suspects in causing particular AEs were
considered.7
The association strength threshold used for qualifying “strong”
and worthy associations was set as 5, resulting in a set of 730
drugs and 1,695 AEs participating in the clustering.

On the basis of this threshold, the biclustering process identified a total of 3,866 biclusters, involving 467 different drugs
and 1,025 different AEs. The maximum number of drugs in a
bicluster was 17 (cancer related), and the maximum number
of AEs was 57 (related to bone disorders). Approximately 33%
of the biclusters were cancer related, i.e., drugs administered
to treat certain types of cancer and AEs commonly associated
with cancer treatments. Accordingly, the most frequently used
drug in the treatment of leukemia, clofarabine, was found in
1,015 biclusters, and the most frequently encountered AE, febrile
­neutropenia (fever caused by a decrease in neutrophil count), a
leading side effect of chemotherapy and radiation, was found in
647 biclusters. Biclusters related to mental disorders accounted

Table 1 Taxonomy of biclusters
Drugs
DR-I: same or similar (class) active agents
1%

Alendronate, ibandronate, risedronate, pamidronate
These are all bisphosphonates
Phenytoin sodium, phenytoin
Phenytoin sodium and phenytoin share the same active ingredient

 DR-II: dissimilar active agents,
same indications
36%

Risperidone, olanzapine, haloperidol
These are all drugs used to treat schizophrenia

 DR-III: dissimilar active agents, dissimilar
indications
63%

Telithromycin, bosentan, sertraline hydrochloride
These are drugs used to treat three different conditions. Telithromycin is an antibiotic used to treat
community-acquired pneumonia. Bosentan is commonly used to treat pulmonary hypertension.
Sertraline is used to treat depression

Gemtuzumab, melphalan, clofarabine
These are antineoplastic drugs used as chemotherapy agents

Adverse events
 AE-I: same or similar AEs
3%

Intentional drug misuse, drug dependence
These AEs are commonly reported with classes of drugs that can be intentionally misused as drugs of abuse

 AE-II: dissimilar AEs, same syndrome
49%

Anxiety, tremor, panic reaction
These characterize the symptoms of a panic attack in patients with panic disorder
Neutropenia, pancytopenia, febrile neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia
These AEs are all related to bone marrow failure

 AE-III: dissimilar AEs, different syndrome
48%

Enterococcal infection, atelectasis, culture of urine sample positive
Although an enterococcal infection can commonly cause a urinary tract infection and a positive result
in urine culture, atelectasis of the lungs is unrelated

Clustered relationships
 R-I: known association between
drugs and AEs
46%

Drugs: leflunomide, telithromycin, bosentan, terbinafine, amphotericin B
AEs: increase in level of γ-glutamyltransferase, increase in blood level of bilirubin, liver disorder, increase
in level of aspartate aminotransferase, increase in level of alanine aminotransferase, increase in blood
level of alkaline phosphatase
All of the above drugs have some association with hepatotoxicity, which can cause one or more of the
aforementioned AEs, all of which were characterized as part of the same syndrome

R-II: indeterminate association
41%

Drugs: nevirapine, efavirenz, zidovudine
AEs: drug resistance, induced abortion, immune reconstitution syndrome, hepatotoxicity, spontaneous
abortion
Although the drugs above are all treatment options for HIV-positive patients, not all the AEs are
associated with the drugs. Drug resistance and immune reconstitution syndrome are well-established
AEs of antiretroviral therapy. However, only efavirenz has clear evidence of danger to the fetus in
pregnant women. None of the drugs are used as abortifacients

R-III: confounding
13%

Drugs: erlotinib, capecitabine, pamidronate, zoledronic acid
AEs: metastases to lung, metastases to bone, metastases to central nervous system
The AEs are all representative of existing cancer states, and all the drugs described in this group are
used to treat varying types of cancer that can produce metastases to lung, bone, and the central
nervous system

AE, adverse event; DR, drug; R, relationship.
Clinical pharmacology & Therapeutics | VOLUME 89 NUMBER 2 | february 2011

245

articles
for ~5% of the total number of biclusters. Other frequently
occurring types of biclusters, accounting for roughly 1% of the
total number of biclusters, were statins (cholesterol level lowering), HIV related, and diabetes related.
Taxonomy of biclusters

Analysis of the biclusters revealed several patterns that were
used to develop a taxonomy characterizing the full set of
biclusters. On the basis of an evaluation sample of 100 biclusters, we approximated the proportions of each category in
the taxonomy. The taxonomy, along with the corresponding
proportions and representative examples, is shown in Table 1.
Each bicluster is described in terms of three elements: drugs
(DRs), AEs, and their relationship (R). DR-I characterizes drug
sets in a bicluster consisting of the same drugs (brand name
and generic name) or similar drugs (same class or same active
ingredients). DR-II characterizes drugs of different classes

prescribed for the same indication, and DR-III characterizes
drugs prescribed for different indications. AEs were categorized in a similar manner. AE-I characterizes clustered events
that are identical or similar, AE-II characterizes those that are
different but correspond to the same syndrome, and AE-III
refers to events representing completely different syndromes.
The relationship between the drugs and AEs in a bicluster can
be classified as R-I, characterizing known associations in which
each drug–AE combination in the bicluster is a known, wellestablished ADE; R-II, characterizing indeterminate associations in which reported support for at least one of the drug–AE
combinations is either nonexistent or very sparse; or R-III,
characterizing confounded associations in which the AEs
were signs or symptoms of the conditions for which the drug
was prescribed (indications). Table 2 provides representative
examples of biclusters classified according to the taxonomy,
along with their average EBGM scores.

Table 2 Classified bicluster examples
Taxonomy

Bicluster example

DR-I/AE-II/R-I

Drugs: valproic acid, sodium valproate, valproate
AEs: epilepsy, dysmorphism, developmental speech disorder, congenital nose malformation, fetal anticonvulsant syndrome
Valproic acid, also known as sodium valproate, valproate, and Depakote, is used in seizure disorders in patients with
epilepsy. The other AEs are the result of its potential for teratogenicity. It is listed by the FDA as a category D drug for use
by pregnant women; it is highly associated with congenital malformations, including facial deformations and neural tube
defects. Although developmental speech disorder is not specifically listed among the AEs of valproic acid, it is highly
plausible that any number of congenital malformations can result in speech disorders. Finally, there is evidence that a
withdrawal syndrome termed fetal anticonvulsant syndrome exists in babies exposed to valproic acid in utero

EBGM
128

DR-III/AE-III/R-II

Drugs: lochol, entacapone, terbinafine, adefovir
AEs: abnormal hepatic function, increase in blood level of creatine phosphokinase, increase in level of alanine
aminotransferase
Lochol is a trade name for cholesterol drugs used outside the United States, where the ingredients may vary. Commonly,
a statin drug is used as a main ingredient, but the specifics differ from country to country. Entacapone is a drug used for
Parkinson’s disease; it acts by inhibiting an enzyme in the liver and kidney responsible for catalyzing levodopa. Terbinafine is
an antifungal drug used in both oral and topical forms. Adefovir is used in chronic hepatitis B. The AEs could not be grouped
together because creatine phosphokinase is not associated with abnormal hepatic function, although it, like hepatotoxicity,
is a rare side effect of statin usage. Terbinafine and adefovir are associated with increases in levels of liver enzymes but have
no association with muscle damage or elevated levels of creatine phosphokinase. It is plausible that entacapone could be
associated with liver damage, given that its major target of inhibition is an enzyme in the liver, but it is unassociated with
elevated levels of creatine phosphokinase. With the knowledge available to us, this grouping sounds implausible

15

DR-II/AE-II/R-III

Drugs: estradiol, pamidronate, zoledronic acid
AEs: abnormality as shown by nuclear MRI, radiotherapy, biopsy, physical disability
All three drugs are indicated for use with bony metastases from metastatic cancers. Estradiol is primarily indicated for
use in metastatic prostate and breast cancer, both of which can cause bony lesions. Pamidronate and zoledronic acid can
be used for the treatment of either bony metastases or primary bone cancers. All the above AEs are confounders—bone
lesions can be associated with abnormal MRIs, radiotherapy, biopsies, and some sort of physical disability

76

DR-III/AE-II/R-I

Drugs: varenicline, sodium oxybate, Ambien CR
AEs: abnormal dreams, somnambulism, abnormal behavior
Varenicline, more commonly known as Chantix, is prescribed as an aid for smoking cessation. Sodium oxybate is prescribed
for narcolepsy. Ambien is prescribed for insomnia. All of the categorized drugs can cause sleeping disorders and behavioral
changes as AEs

35

DR-III/AE-II/R-II

Drugs: cyclosporine, telithromycin, carbamazepine, azathioprine
AEs: blood lactate dehydrogenase increased, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly
The drugs belong to different categories. Cyclosporine is an immunosuppressant given after organ transplants.
Telithromycin is an antibiotic given for community-acquired pneumonia. Carbamazepine is an anticonvulsant.
Azathioprine is an immunosuppressant given after renal transplant but is also used for a wide variety of immune system
disorders. The AEs were characterized together as signs of a particular type of immune hemolytic anemia that is heretofore
unassociated with any of the categorized drugs. Because both cyclosporine and azathioprine are immunomodulators, it
is plausible that this collection of AEs could represent a new side-effect profile based on the drugs’ action on the immune
system. Nonetheless, it is more difficult to find a plausible reason for telithromycin and carbamazepine to cause hemolytic
anemia, although it is certainly possible

17

AE, adverse event; DR, drug; EBGM, empirical Bayesian geometric mean; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; R, relationship.
246

VOLUME 89 NUMBER 2 | february 2011 | www.nature.com/cpt

articles
Statistical tests

The expected number and probability of occurrence of a random bicluster was 0.05 (less than one expected bicluster) and
1.1 × 10−18 respectively, demonstrating that it is extremely
unlikely that the bicluster structure found in the data is random.
The P value obtained for the hypothesis test that a known ADE
bicluster would have arisen just by chance is extremely small
(<1 × 10−100), exceeding the precision limits of our computing
environment.
Discussion

Overall, the results demonstrate that a significant number (46%)
of bona fide biclusters, which relate common ADEs by grouping
similar drugs with a common set of known and often similar AEs,
were identified by our method. The two test statistics indicate
that it is extremely unlikely that the bicluster structure, as well as
its content, occurred by chance. A large proportion (41%) of the
clustered relationships were classified as indeterminate, owing to
one or more drug–AE pairs in the cluster being an indeterminate
ADE. However, this suggests the need for further investigation
and does not necessarily indicate that the unrecognized ADE
association is incorrect. In fact, one of the goals of clustering is
to provide insight into the etiology of ADEs in cases in which
unrecognized and potentially novel ADEs are highlighted by
their affiliation to a set of known ADEs in a cluster. For example,
a cluster classified as indeterminate (R-II) linked the following
drugs to measures of liver toxicity: leflunomide, telithromycin,
bosentan, chlorpromazine, entacapone, lapatinib, gemtuzumab,
letrozole, terbinafine, arsenic trioxide, fluvoxamine, amphotericin B, carbamazepine, micafungin, clofarabine, deferasirox,
and miglitol. Only some of these have well-­established links to
hepatic dysfunction. For the rest, there is less definitive support
linking them to liver dysfunction, but reports do exist in the
medical literature. For instance, chlorpromazine does not have
hepatotoxicity listed as an AE in the drug database Micromedex,
but older case reports describe a syndrome known as chlorpromazine hepatic hypersensitivity with concomitant biochemical
alterations of liver function tests.17 Likewise, the antidepressant
fluvoxamine has no established effect on the liver, but a recent
case report describes a patient with abnormal liver function tests
who was found on liver biopsy to have tissue damage thought
to be due to fluvoxamine.18 Other examples dealing with the
identification of potentially novel ADEs, such as the drug–
event pairs chlorpromazine–hepatotoxicity, fluvoxamine–liver
­toxicity, mirtazapine–inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion, ­bevacizumab–reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy
syndrome, methotrexate–pancytopenia, vorinostat–atelectasis,
bosentan–hepatic steatosis, and busulfan–hyperkalemia, are discussed in Supplementary Data S1 online.
The results also suggest that the proposed methodology is useful in several other aspects of pharmacovigilance. First, clustering provides a rationale for aggregating various preparations
of the same drugs in order to focus on the active agent. This is
demon­strated in drug clusters that represent either various forms
of the same drug (e.g., phenytoin, phenytoin sodium) or generic
and branded preparations (e.g., proventil HFA, albuterol). These

synonymous but unique terms were found to be consistently
clustered to the same or similar AEs. It follows, therefore, that
mapping of the drugs to the “active ingredient” should increase
the signal, maximizing the potential for identifying rare events.
This type of mapping is already possible using RXNORM,19 but
it has not been entirely completed.
Clustering also provides a rationale for aggregating individual
AEs into syndromes. For example, initial insomnia, nightmare,
abnormal dreams are all manifestations of “disordered sleep.”
Mapping each of these manifestations to a common parent
term such as “disordered sleep” should, in principle, increase
the strength of a potential drug–AE association.
Clustering of drugs and AEs may also provide information
about whether the AE associated with a particular agent is likely
to be either unique to that particular agent or a class effect.
When an agent is shown to cause an AE and is the first in its
class known to do so, it is not initially known whether the effect
is unique to that particular drug or whether it is a class effect.
We found numerous situations in which many members of the
same drug class were associated with particular AEs, suggesting
the potential for any member of a class to cause a given AE. For
example, the bisphosphonate drugs alendronate, alendronate
sodium, and pamidronate were all paired with the AEs: impaired
healing, femur fracture, and jaw pain. The impaired AE healing
is nonspecific but most likely means healing after a fracture, the
impairment of which is a common side effect associated with
bisphosphonates. Femur fractures and aseptic necrosis of the
jaw (causing jaw pain) are also more likely in alendronate and
pamidronate. The manner in which these symptoms clustered
to the class of bisphosphonates makes it likely that these effects
are class specific. Not surprisingly, both risedronate and ibandronate, also bisphosphonates, can cause this similar side-effect
profile.
Clustering also highlights areas in the data that should be
focused on to enhance detection of novel ADEs. For example,
we observed that a large proportion (~40%) of the biclusters
identified were related to cancer or mental disorders. This outcome was not surprising and resulted in numerous associations
of AEs that are common and known. A plausible explanation
for this dominance is that a large proportion of clinical trials
are actively testing new anticancer and psychiatric drugs, and
many of the reports submitted to AERS are typically by pharmaceutical companies reporting safety issues identified during
the trials. Therefore, removing these biclusters containing ADEs
that are common and known would provide an opportunity for
enhanced targeting of novel ADEs associated with other disorders and their related therapies.
In summary, the findings demonstrate the importance and
utility of this biclustering methodology for many important
aspects of pharmacovigilance noted in several prominent studies.
Biclustering provides insight into the etiology of known ADEs
and facilitates the identification of novel ADEs. It suggests methods and provides a rationale for aggregating terminologies used
to describe ADEs. In addition, biclustering can be used to identify AEs of drug classes. It highlights areas of focus and provides
an opportunity for enhanced targeting of novel ADEs. Finally, it

Clinical pharmacology & Therapeutics | VOLUME 89 NUMBER 2 | february 2011

247

articles
provides an exploratory tool for data mining in pharmacovigilance with which the underlying large and complex database can
be summarized and described in a big-picture manner, capturing
important patterns as well as highlighting data quality issues,
which can then be used to improve the signal-detection process.
We note that the proposed approach is fundamentally different
from existing approaches, and therefore a direct comparison with
existing methods is not possible. In addition, no claim is made
that the proposed approach is able to identify ADEs that existing
approaches cannot identify. In fact, because the method is based
on an existing DMA (GPS) as a step prior to clustering, the same
drug–AE associations will be reported.
Methods

Data sources. The data used in this analysis included the latest full-

year set of individual AERS reports available, published in 2008, which
offers the opportunity to examine newer ADEs. Of the drugs and AEs
appearing in the reports, we selected only drugs reported as “primary
suspect” and AEs that appeared in reports categorized as having a
“serious” patient outcome. Demographic information including gender and age, necessary for stratification, was extracted from AERS and
linked to each report. Additionally, we limited our analysis to drug–AE
­combinations that appeared at least three times.
The following provides a brief discussion of each of the steps depicted
in Figure 2.
Drug name mapping. Unlike the suspect AEs and the indications, which

are coded using the MedDRA terminology, drugs are entered as textual
terms. Each drug obtained from a report was mapped to a UMLS19 drug

code using MedLEE,20 an existing NLP system. If the drug name included
a dose or route, e.g., “Avandia (2 mg) tablets,” the more general UMLS
code consisting of only the drug name was chosen over the more specific code, e.g., C0875967, corresponding to “Avandia.” If the drug name
could not be mapped, it was left as is. Finally, UMLS codes were mapped
to generics using RXNORM.19 Thus, C0875967, corresponding to the
brand name Avandia, would be mapped to C0289313, corresponding to
the generic name “rosiglitazone.”
Duplicate reporting. It is suggested that between 5 and 20% of the total

number of reports submitted to AERS are duplicates,21,22 and therefore
one can expect thousands of duplicates to exist in the database, allowing thousands of spurious associations to be generated. Whereas the
FDA uses a proprietary algorithm, our method for identifying duplicate
reports is based on searching through reports that contain at least eight
drugs/AEs, for pairs of reports that have an exact match of the reported
drugs, AEs, and demographic data (age, gender, weight, and dates). The
requirement for a match based on a set of at least eight drugs/AEs minimizes the probability of a match by chance. Nonetheless, many entries
that may be duplicates do not demonstrate an exact match, mostly
because of missing data or follow-ups, which add or remove a small
number of drugs/AEs. However, identifying this type of duplication with
high accuracy is a much harder task and beyond the scope of this study.
We note that a possible solution has been proposed by Noren et al.,21 but
their method was fitted to the World Health Organization SRS (http://
www.who-umc.org), and it is not clear how well it will generalize to
AERS.
Stratification. The variables used for stratification included age, gender,

and calendar year. The age variable was partitioned into four strata: pediatric (ages 0–15), young adults (ages 15–45), middle age (ages 45–70), and
geriatric (ages 70 and above). Missing stratum data resulted in an extra

Figure 3 Graphical display of Bimax clustering results. The pane on the right displays a binary heat map annotated with drugs along the left and adverse events
(AEs) along the top. Red cells in the heat map indicate that a drug and an AE are strongly associated; green indicates that they are weakly associated or not
associated. After clustering, the heat map is rearranged to display a cluster (selected from the pane on the left) in the upper left corner of the map. This example
shows a cluster of four cancer-related drugs and their seven common associated AEs. The pane on the left displays the loaded data matrix, analysis steps, and a
clustering summary sorted according to cluster size.
248

VOLUME 89 NUMBER 2 | february 2011 | www.nature.com/cpt

articles
NA stratum for each of the stratification variables, and an overall number
of strata equal to 15 (5 age × 3 gender × 1 calendar year).
Disproportionality analysis using GPS. In order to perform clustering, it

was first necessary to identify all drugs–AE pairs that are strongly associated. Of those that are strongly associated, the clustering then groups
drugs that are strongly associated with a common set of AEs. To compute
drug–AE association strengths, we used the GPS method, which was
implemented exactly as described in the original article.9
Biclustering. The clustering data matrix consisted of m rows, each rep-

resenting a different drug, and n columns, each representing a different
AE, where each cell in the matrix initially contained the GPS EBGM
association strength value corresponding to the i-th drug and the j-th
AE. This matrix was then transformed into a binary data matrix in which
each cell contained either a 1 or a 0, representing the states of “strongly
associated” or “weakly associated,” respectively. The transformation was
performed by selecting an “association strength threshold” and reflects
the fundamental idea that drugs and AEs either are or are not associated
in a causal relationship and that, in a practical sense, discovering this type
of relationship is the ultimate goal. Moreover, clustering based on association strengths would have painted a completely different picture, not
aligned with our goals. For example, drug–AE pairs that are associated
only by chance, or even not associated at all, would have been clustered
together merely because they share a common low value of association
strength.
Binary inclusion-maximal biclustering (Bimax),23 used in this work,
is one of the several biclustering algorithms included in Biclustering
Analysis Toolbox,24 a software platform for biclustering data analysis
and visualization. Bimax assumes a binary data model in which each
entry in the data matrix is either 1 or 0, making it consistent with our
clustering model. Bimax is designed to find maximal submatrices of the
data matrix, in which all elements have a value equal to 1. Translating to
our problem, Bimax is able to find the largest clusters, such that each is
made of a subset of drugs that are all strongly associated with the same
subset of AEs. One of the main advantages of Bimax is that, in contrast
to most clustering algorithms, it is an exact algorithm that is able to find
all of the biclusters that exist in the data. Supplementary Data S2 online
provides a more detailed discussion of biclustering.
Bimax requires the user to prespecify two parameters: the minimum
number of drugs and the minimum number of AEs needed to define
a bicluster. We selected three as the minimum for both drugs and AEs
because a number smaller than this would have produced a very large
number of uninteresting small clusters. Figure 3 shows a sample of ADE
biclusters produced by Bimax, displayed in a binary heat map.
Evaluation. Validation of clustering results is generally a difficult task in

the absence of a gold standard, which is typically the case. In the context of pharmacovigilance, the problem is exacerbated, given that the
evaluation of even a single drug–AE association, not to mention a set of
associations that make up a cluster, is difficult because of the absence of a
gold standard (set of all true ADEs is unknown). As a result, evaluation in
terms of sensitivity and specificity is usually not possible unless a small set
of study ADEs is selected prior to data mining, which is not the case here.
One of the more common methods of evaluation in pharmacovigilance
is the application of human expertise.5,7 Following this practice, the full
set of biclusters identified by our approach were ranked according to
the average EBGM measure between each drug–AE pair in a bicluster,
and a random sample of 100 biclusters (from the full range of average
EBGM measures) was given to two clinical experts for manual review
and qualitative evaluation. Known ADEs were validated by the experts
using Micromedex,25 which is considered a reliable and trusted reference
for medications and their associated ADEs.
In addition, two statistical tests were conducted to demonstrate that
(i) it is extremely unlikely that the bicluster structure arose in our data
just by chance and (ii) it is extremely unlikely that a known ADE bicluster

arose just by chance. As a limiting case, 3 × 3 biclusters (smallest size)
were considered. In order to demonstrate the validity of statement (i), a
standard graph theoretic approach was used to compute the expected
number and probability of random 3 × 3 complete bipartite graphs, given
the sparseness of our data (probability of an association/edge). To demonstrate the validity of statement (ii), a hypothesis test was conducted by
creating a set of 100 random 3 × 3 biclusters sampled from the AERS drug
and AE distributions and by comparing the number of known biclusters
(R-I) identified in the random set with the number of known biclusters
identified by our method. The P value in this test is the probability of
observing a large (or larger) difference between the proportion of known
biclusters identified by the method and the proportion of known biclusters identified in the randomly generated set, given the (null) hypothesis
of no difference between the two proportions. Supplementary Data S3
online provides a more technical description of the two tests.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.nature.com/cpt
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by grants 1R01LM010016,
3R01LM010016-01S1, 3R01LM010016-02S1, and R01LM006910, from
the National Library of Medicine. We thank Dowman Varn for his useful
comments and Lyudmila Shagina and Jianhua Li for their assistance in
extracting and preprocessing the data.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declared no conflict of interest.
© 2011 American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics

1.	Almenoff, J.S., Pattishall, E.N., Gibbs, T.G., DuMouchel, W., Evans, S.J. & Yuen, N.
Novel statistical tools for monitoring the safety of marketed drugs. Clin.
Pharmacol. Ther. 82, 157–166 (2007).
2. Bates, D.W. et al. The costs of adverse drug events in hospitalized patients.
Adverse Drug Events Prevention Study Group. JAMA 277, 307–311 (1997).
3. Classen, D.C., Pestotnik, S.L., Evans, R.S., Lloyd, J.F. & Burke, J.P. Adverse
drug events in hospitalized patients. Excess length of stay, extra costs,
and attributable mortality. JAMA 277, 301–306 (1997).
4. US Food and Drug Administration. Adverse Event Reporting System
<http://www.fda.gov/cder/aers/default.htm> (2009).
5. Hauben, M., Madigan, D., Gerrits, C.M., Walsh, L. & Van Puijenbroek, E.P.
The role of data mining in pharmacovigilance. Expert Opin. Drug Saf. 4,
929–948 (2005).
6. Wilson, A.M., Thabane, L. & Holbrook, A. Application of data mining
techniques in pharmacovigilance. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 57, 127–134 (2004).
7.	Almenoff, J. et al. Perspectives on the use of data mining in pharmacovigilance. Drug Saf. 28, 981–1007 (2005).
8. Bate, A. & Evans, S.J. Quantitative signal detection using spontaneous ADR
reporting. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 18, 427–436 (2009).
9. DuMouchel, W. Bayesian data mining in large frequency tables, with an
application to the FDA Spontaneous Reporting System. Am. Stat. 53,
177–190 (1999).
10. Szarfman, A., Machado, S.G. & O’Neill, R.T. Use of screening algorithms and
computer systems to efficiently signal higher-than-expected combinations of
drugs and events in the US FDA’s spontaneous reports database. Drug Saf. 25,
381–392 (2002).
11. Stephenson, W.P. & Hauben, M. Data mining for signals in spontaneous
reporting databases: proceed with caution. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 16,
359–365 (2007).
12.	Fliri, A.F., Loging, W.T., Thadeio, P.F. & Volkmann, R.A. Analysis of drug-induced
effect patterns to link structure and side effects of medicines. Nat. Chem. Biol.
1, 389–397 (2005).
13. O’Neill, R.T. & Szarfman, A. Data mining in large frequency tables, with an
application to the FDA spontaneous reporting system: discussion. Am. Stat.
53, 190–196 (1999).
14. Brown, E.G. Effects of coding dictionary on signal generation: a consideration
of use of MedDRA compared with WHO-ART. Drug Saf. 25, 445–452 (2002).
15. Kriegel, H., Kröger, P., Zimek, A. Clustering high-dimensional data: a survey
on subspace clustering, pattern-based clustering, and correlation clustering.
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data 3, 1–58 (2009).

Clinical pharmacology & Therapeutics | VOLUME 89 NUMBER 2 | february 2011

249

articles
16. Madeira, S.C. & Oliveira, A.L. Biclustering algorithms for biological data
analysis: a survey. IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinform. 1, 24–45 (2004).
17. Breuer, R.I. Chlorpromazine hepatotoxicity manifested by a selective and
sustained rise of serum alkaline phosphatase activity; report of a case. Am. J.
Dig. Dis. 10, 727–731 (1965).
18. Solomons, K., Gooch, S. & Wong, A. Toxicity with selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors. Am. J. Psychiatry 162, 1225 (2005).
19. National Library of Medicine. Unified Medical Language System
<http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/rxnorm/> (2010).
20.	Friedman, C., Shagina, L., Lussier, Y. & Hripcsak, G. Automated encoding of
clinical documents based on natural language processing. J. Am. Med. Inform.
Assoc. 11, 392–402 (2004).

250

21. Noren, G.N., Orre, R., Bate, A. & Edwards, I.R. Duplicate detection in
adverse drug reaction surveillance. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 14, 305–328
(2007).
22. Hauben, M., Reich, L., DeMicco, J. & Kim, K. ‘Extreme duplication’ in the US
FDA Adverse Events Reporting System database. Drug Safety 30, 551–554
(2007).
23. Prelic, A. et al. A systematic comparison and evaluation of biclustering
methods for gene expression data. Bioinformatics 22, 1122–1129 (2006).
24. Barkow, S., Bleuler, S., Prelic, A., Zimmermann, P. & Zitzler, E. BicAT: a
biclustering analysis toolbox. Bioinformatics 22, 1282–1283 (2006).
25. Micromedex Healthcare Series [Internet database]. Greenwood Village, CO:
Thomson Reuters (Healthcare). Updated periodically, 2010.

VOLUME 89 NUMBER 2 | february 2011 | www.nature.com/cpt

