Perspective

Active Monitoring of Adverse Drug Reactions with Neural
Network Technology
Tao Wu1, Chang‑Chun Gao1, Jing‑Sheng Lin2, Jia‑Ling Zha3
The Glorious Sun School of Business and Management, Donghua University, Shanghai 200051, China
Department of Information Technology, Ruijin Hospital Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China
3
Department of Information Technology, Xinhua Hospital Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China
1

2

Key words: Artificial Intelligence; Deep Learning; Drug Hypersensitivity; Neural Networks

Introduction
An adverse drug reaction (ADR) is unintended injuries
caused by the drug at normal doses during normal use.[1]
ADR monitoring is a long‑term work of medical institutions.
Medical institutions at all levels have their corresponding
requirements of reporting ADRs.[1] On December 12, 2010,
the National Health and Family Planning Commission of the
People’s Republic of China issued the “Administration of
adverse drug reaction report and monitoring”. The aims were
to enhance drug postmarketing surveillance, standardize
ADR monitoring and reporting, and control drug risks in a
timely and effective manner to ensure the safety of patients.
It was suggested that local pharmaceutical supervisory
and administrative departments should establish an ADR
monitoring institution responsible for timely ADR reporting
and monitoring within their respective administrative
areas.[2] Currently, there are three main methods used to
monitor ADRs namely regular review, patient follow‑up,
and spontaneous reporting which is widely used in local
hospitals. However, due to the lack of incentives for local
medical staff in reporting ADRs and shortage of personnel
in pharmacy departments monitoring ADRs, the most
critical step in the reporting and monitoring system does not
work effectively. Thus, problems have emerged that ADR
monitoring is not timely, accurate and comprehensive, which
posts a direct threat to people’s health.[2]
Nowadays, big data technology is highly developed. With the
help of intelligent information mining of a large number of
electronic medical records (EMRs), it becomes possible to
automatically detect adverse drug events which are hidden
in the EMRs and are not timely reported. It has become
a hot issue to be solved by current medical management
Access this article online
Quick Response Code:

Automatic Monitoring Methods on Adverse
Drug Reaction and Deficiencies
With the development of hospital information system (HIS)
data integration, HIS‑based ADR automatic monitoring
system gradually progressed. Some related concepts of
this new research area have been defined by the professors
of Harvard University and Duke University. Meanwhile,
they expanded and identified a number of methodologies.
Automatic screening method mainly has two types natural
language process and trigger technical principles.[3] The
latter is widely used in domestic automatic monitoring
systems, but it can only screen out the adverse reactions
which set the trigger phrases. Unfortunately, these trigger
phrases are always limited to drug concentration, test
indicators, and other quantitative index. In China, the
programming of medical language coding processing is
Address for correspondence: Prof. Chang‑Chun Gao,
The Glorious Sun School of Business and Management,
Donghua University, Shanghai 200051, China
E‑Mail: gcc369@dhu.edu.cn
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 3.0 License, which allows others to remix,
tweak, and build upon the work non‑commercially, as long as the author is credited
and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.
For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com

Website:
www.cmj.org

DOI:
10.4103/0366-6999.207468

1498

organizations as how to establish an automatic and intelligent
system to monitor ADRs in local hospitals. The system
should be capable of detecting ADRs in a timely and accurate
manner. Therefore, this paper discussed how to use artificial
intelligence technology, such as neural network and deep
learning, to analyze abnormal phenomenon in a large number
of EMRs of medical institutions, and thus to accomplish
intelligent screening of adverse drug events.

© 2017 Chinese Medical Journal ¦ Produced by Wolters Kluwer ‑ Medknow

Received: 02-01-2017 Edited by: Ning-Ning Wang
How to cite this article: Wu T, Gao CC, Lin JS, Zha JL. Active
Monitoring of Adverse Drug Reactions with Neural Network Technology.
Chin Med J 2017;130:1498-501.
Chinese Medical Journal ¦ June 20, 2017 ¦ Volume 130 ¦ Issue 12

yet to be developed, the technology of text information
automatic recognition is not mature, thus the medical
records of doctors and nurses could not be well identified.[4]
The latest ADR monitoring system is to use information
technology, trigger technical principles, and identification
technology to extract, collect, and analyze information
from the electronic medical database, finally identify the
clinically significant ADR. In this field, commonly used
analysis methods include proportional ADR reporting ratio,
reporting odds ratio, Bayesian Confidence Propagation
Neural Network (BCPNN), empirical Bayesian Gamma
Poisson Shrinker, etc.[4] The WHO’s Uppsala International
Drug Monitoring Collaboration Center used BCPNN to
analyze, by which they identified a number of ADRs,
such as identification of acidosis and esophagitis as the
most common adverse reaction of alendronate sodium
and confirmation the association between pericarditis and
practolol.[4]
Currently, there are mainly two methods used to monitor
ADRs world widely, including spontaneous reporting
and active surveillance. Due to the lack of interest and
incentives, local medical staffs are often not willing or
are too busy to report actively ADRs. With regard to the
local hospital management, due to concerns about the
impact of medical disputes, they often lack the drive to
report accurately ADRs. These failings lead inevitably
to a realistic lack of spontaneous reporting.[3] In terms of
active surveillance, the limitations of medical management
institutional capacity results in time lag and limited coverage
of ADRs monitoring. A delay in bringing ADRs information
to the health‑care team threatens the healthy operation
of the hospital and patient safety.[3] With the maturity of
the network technology and the popularization of HIS,
Computerized Physician Order Entry and EMRs could
store medical diagnoses, clinical examinations, tests, and
medical documents during patient hospitalization. Under
the help of intelligent data‑mining, it is possible to detect
existing ADRs in medical records with a massive database
of patient data.[5] This methodology is still in its initial stages
in China because of the limited availability of data‑mining
technology.

Development of Related Information Technology
Big data technology

In 2009, Google published a paper about flu prediction
in Nature, which is the paradigm of data technology
applied in medical and public health, and attracted much
attention from health‑care professions. The most frequent
50 million retrieved entries on Google were compared
with data about the seasonal influenza transmission
period from the Center for Disease Control between
2003 and 2008. The retrieved records were used to
determine whether flu occurred or not. Analysis of the
results showed that the data statistical curve from Google
could not only predict the flu situation, but also specify
the district or state where the flu outbreak occurred.
Chinese Medical Journal ¦ June 20, 2017 ¦ Volume 130 ¦ Issue 12

With the help of data‑mining in medical research,
resolving specific historical problems in medicine (such
as identifying ADRs) has become possible.

Neural network and deep learning

In 1943, the psychologist W. McCulloch and mathematical
logician W. Pitts established neural networks and
mathematical models, known as the mathematical
programming (MP) models.[6] Using an MP model, they
proposed a formal mathematical description and a network
structure method of neurons, which proved that the single
neuron could perform the logic function, thus creating the
era of artificial neural network research. At present, neural
networks and deep learning provide the best solution for
many problems in image and speech recognition, and in
natural language processing.
In 2006, Prof. Hinton, the founder of the academic field
of deep learning and a professor at the University of
Toronto, Canada, based on the hierarchical nature of
human brain cognitive processes, proposed to increase
the number of layers and neurons in the artificial neural
network to construct deep neural networks to obtain
excellent feature learning ability, which was confirmed
in a series of subsequent experiments. This event
aroused great interest in academia and industry and
stimulated a wave of deep learning studies with large
data applications.[7]
Conventionally, the process of data analysis involves
experience and knowledge of random samples, building
up models, and the analysis and mining of the data and
information based on specific models.[8] It used to be a
useful approach because the objectives are always structured
and simple involving a small dataset. However, in the big
data environment, the traditional data analysis has inherent
shortcomings – too much dependency on professional
knowledge, difficulty of data migration, inaccuracy, etc. In
the big data environment, it is necessary to analyze the rules
and characteristics from huge, unstructured databases, to
extract the useful information from massive, complicated,
and multi‑sourced data. The practice has proved that it is
feasible for intelligent calculation of big data analysis – using
a combination of depth study and neural analysis to sort
through multi‑sourced data.

Construction of Intelligent Active Monitoring
System for Hospital Adverse Drug Reactions
With the application of big data analysis and in‑depth
learning in a large number of EMRs, the abnormal events
of medical procedures can be more comprehensive
found, which provide an efficient and accurate
evaluation model for actively monitoring of drug
safety. Among them, it is one of the hot topics that
active detection and detection of possible ADRs with
the multi‑mode mining in clinical medical information
resources, and a number of more feasible detection
theories and model are formed. [9]
1499

Main technologies of intelligent monitoring system

Trigger technology
With the technology of big data analysis, establish basic
standards for regular diagnosis related groups and design
a trigger to detect an ADR by monitoring patients’ medical
records in real time. When patients receive a nonprimary
disease‑related treatment, the trigger alarm will be activated
if abnormal treatment is given. Subsequently, a medical
administrator will review the treatment of such a patient and
discover the problem.
Key words automation mining technology
Trigger technology can only deal with the standard structural
data, leading to a limitation in information collection. With
the help of speech recognition and word segmentation
technology, text records of medical treatments can be
automatically recognized, thereafter making it possible to
determine whether an ADR occurs in one or a large cohort of
patients.[5] This technology can help a medical administrator
to monitor and analyze ADRs events more efficiently and
with great accuracy.
On the basis of the above two technologies, analyze the
relationship of indexes changing in medical records,
establish multiple association regulations, and establish a
calculation detection model. This model could be used to
screen EMRs of patients to discover any existing abnormal
cases. The potential ADRs detected by computer will be
finally identified by physicians and pharmacists to discover
the true extent of ADRs in a potentially huge cohort of
patients.

Design of main system modules

There are four main sections that constitute the Medical
Behavior Intelligent Monitoring System:
1. Insightful data‑mining: By data‑mining on massive
medical histories, the system will extract data from
different systems that related to ADRs monitoring, and
build up a big‑data platform afterward. By doing this,
there will be relevant records including doctors’ orders,
course of disease, check‑sickbed records, operation
records, and body‑check index collected and stored in
HIS
2. Intelligent data processing: Using the techniques
of Chinese Word Segmentation and part‑of‑word
tagging, keyword auto‑mining, deep learning/nerve
net and image recognition, an ADRs monitoring and
filtering model can be built up. The model will analyze
patients’ medical information and checking results, and
simultaneously find suspected ADRs
3. Artificial confirmation: Based on the big‑data platform
and keyword auto‑mining sections, the system contains
an experts‑involving data filtering system which can
monitor ADRs spontaneously. Experts need to check,
track, and confirm the ADRs filtered by machine. After
the artificial processing, a conclusion of ADRs can be
drawn
4. Data reporting and docking: A data standard will be
determined for the docking between current and new
1500

systems. Therefore, the intelligent analysis result of
ADRs can be automatically tracked and reported.

Main process of system operation

Data extraction of patients’ medical records
During data extraction, the main factor that must be
considered is the efficiency of data transmission; a large
amount of data must be extracted from the operation
system to the data pool for processing in a certain period.[10]
Microsoft Server Integration Services provides concurrent
and multiple pipelining extraction capabilities. Although
concurrent operation can speed up the transmission speed,
the influence on the operation system database must be taken
into account. The amount of pipelining and the throughput
must be controlled. Medical order information, electronic
pathology, surgical information, medication information,
and examination information of each patient will produce
hundreds of thousands or even millions of detailed data
which need to be extracted to the data pool according to
project requirements. Each data extraction operation will
consume much time, therefore, an optimized data extraction
program based on the original method must be developed.
After analysis of operation data, the data are classified
into two categories according to the update status and data
volume: (1) One type of data is characterized by a low
frequency of updates; the amount of data has always been
maintained at an order of magnitude, such as dictionary tables
and code tables; (2) Another type of data is characterized by
a large amount of data and frequent updates, which always
accompanied by corresponding update time information
such as doctor’s orders and surgical tables. Based on the
characteristics of these two types of data, we designed a
program that can take into account both of them, using a
complete data extraction model and an incremental data
extraction model, respectively. Complete data extraction
model: all the data in the current target database should be
deleted when the data are extracted each time, and then all
the data are extracted from the data source. The advantage
of this approach is to solve completely the inconsistency of
data between the data source and target database. However,
one drawback is that a large amount of data needs to be
extracted and this will take a long time to analyze. Each
extraction may take several hours or even more than 10 h for
the massive data table to be evaluated.[11] Incremental data
extraction mode: only the data in the data source different
from those in the target database are extracted every time.
In general, a time‑stamp is used to extract the data updated
after the last extraction.[11] This approach greatly reduces
the amount of data extracted each time, but the drawback is
that it is very likely to cause missing data if the incremental
extraction rules are not perfect during each data extraction,
and the data in the target database can not be updated in real
time when the data in the data source are changed.
Intelligent screening and monitoring
In the intelligent screening of adverse medical events, an
important factor of poor performance of Chinese natural
Chinese Medical Journal ¦ June 20, 2017 ¦ Volume 130 ¦ Issue 12

language processing in the terminological database is
the large number of unrecorded words (so‑called words
that cannot be found in the dictionary, such as “cerebral
infarction” or “anorexia”), especially, the recognition of
medical field acronyms and professional words. We used
a professional lexicon from a large number of medical
dictionaries, which greatly improved the accuracy of word
segmentation.[12] For the new word recognition algorithm, we
used the dynamic n‑gram model, dynamic sliding window
algorithm, high‑performance word frequency statistical
technique, long‑term accumulation, and professional
dictionary management, thus ensuring the dictionary’s
universality and authority.

medical organizations, and provide technical support to
automatically detect ADRs in a fully operational system.
However, due to the feature of dynamic revolution
on monitoring ADRs, working personnel must have a
strict, rigorous attitude, and be trained to work with
the developing technology. Learning from advanced
experience from other country, we completed an automatic
monitoring system for ADRs, realized the conversion
from “reporting after event” to “monitoring in real time”,
which will provide the technical support for health‑care
personnel, and will greatly improve patient safety when
drugs are administered.

For example, to predict whether the associated diagnosis
could trigger an allergic reaction and to obtain a more
accurate probability through the models based on much
data. This idea is based on the concept of neural network
technology; it also can identify the cause of this forecast and
the factors for the probability of allergic reactions.

Nil.

Using the graph theory algorithm, related graph‑based
learning techniques and the associated graph database,
a relational network capable of describing the complex
semantics of the real world can be established among
the language elements. The program can start from a
language element node (e.g., “cerebral infarction”) to
obtain approximate, extended and other important elements
through different depth, breadth, weight, and direction.[12]
This concept revealed a huge supporting role in considering
a medical corpus based on time, spatial cues, and global
analysis, which were not available using traditional machine
learning techniques.
Participation of experts
The artificial analysis provided by a team of relevant experts
is necessary for every result of intelligent processing. It can
ensure the accuracy of the data monitoring and avoid errors
of automatic processing.
Connecting with reporting system
A data standard and interface needs to be built up after the
big data platform producing the ADRs monitoring results
and hence that the results can be reported automatically
through systems. With the help of hierarchical information
push technique, the ADRs monitoring results can be batch
uploaded directly, which will save the time of doctors’ work,
reduce the work pressures of clinical departments, decrease
the time from determining ADRs to reporting it, and enhance
monitoring quality.

Conclusions and Expectations
This paper discussed a variety of active ADRs monitoring
methods and considered related technologies including
neural network (deep learning) and big data analysis
technology. We also intent to provide a feasible method
for intelligent monitoring of adverse drug events to
accomplish massive medical record data‑mining and smart
processing, realize intelligent analysis of ADRs for local
Chinese Medical Journal ¦ June 20, 2017 ¦ Volume 130 ¦ Issue 12

Financial support and sponsorship
Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts of interest.

References
1.

2.

3.
4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

Ezeuko AY, Ebenebe UE, Nnebue CC, Ugoji JO. Factors
associated with the reporting of adverse drug reactions by health
workers in Nnewi Nigeria. Int J Prev Med 2015;6:25. doi:
10.4103/2008‑7802.153862.
Ahmad A, Patel I, Balkrishnan R, Mohanta GP, Manna PK.
An evaluation of knowledge, attitude and practice of Indian
pharmacists towards adverse drug reaction reporting:
A pilot study. Perspect Clin Res 2013;4:204‑10. doi:
10.4103/2229‑3485.120168.
Lei Z, Ping H, Ying L. Monitoring status and existing problems
of adverse drug reaction in China (in Chinese). Chin Pharm Aff
2016;30:729‑34. doi: 10.16153/j.1002‑7777.
Ghosh S, Acharya LD, Rao PG. Study and evaluation of
the various cutaneous adverse drug reactions in Kasturba
hospital, Manipal. Indian J Pharm Sci 2006;68:212‑5. doi:
10.4103/0250‑474X.25717.
Kalaiselvan V, Thota P, Singh GN. Pharmacovigilance Programme
of India: Recent developments and future perspectives. Indian J
Pharmacol 2016;48:624‑8. doi: 10.4103/0253‑7613.194855.
Gholami K, Babaie F, Shalviri G, Javadi MR, Faghihi T.
Pediatric hospital admission due to adverse drug reactions:
Report from a tertiary center. J Res Pharm Pract 2015;4:212‑5.
doi: 10.4103/2279‑042X.167045.
Candore G, Juhlin K, Manlik K, Thakrar B, Quarcoo N, Seabroke S,
et al. Comparison of statistical signal detection methods within and
across spontaneous reporting databases. Drug Saf 2015;38:577‑87.
doi: 10.1007/s40264‑015‑0289‑5.
Madigan D, Ryan PB, Schuemie M, Stang PE, Overhage JM,
Hartzema AG, et al. Evaluating the impact of database heterogeneity
on observational study results. Am J Epidemiol 2013;178:645‑51.
doi: 10.1093/aje/kwt010.
Madigan D, Stang PE, Berlin JA, Schuemie M, Overhage JM,
Suchard MA, et al. A systematic statistical approach to evaluating
evidence from observational studies. Annu Rev Stat Appl J
2014;1:11‑39. doi: 10.1146/annurev‑statistics‑022513‑115645.
Silva IR, Kulldorff M. Continuous versus group sequential analysis
for post‑market drug and vaccine safety surveillance. Biometrics
2015;71:851‑8. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2014.77.
Harpaz R, DuMouchel W, Shah NH, Madigan D, Ryan P, Friedman C.
Novel data‑mining methodologies for adverse drug event discovery
and analysis. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2012;91:1010‑21. doi: 10.1038/
clpt.2012.50.
Sridhar SB, Al‑Thamer SS, Jabbar R. Monitoring of adverse drug
reactions in psychiatry outpatient department of a Secondary Care
Hospital of Ras Al Khaimah, UAE. J Basic Clin Pharm 2016;7:80‑6.
doi: 10.4103/0976‑0105.183263.
1501

