ARTICLE

An Application of Machine Learning in
Pharmacovigilance: Estimating Likely Patient
Genotype From Phenotypical Manifestations
of Fluoropyrimidine Toxicity
Luis Correia Pinheiro1,*, Julie Durand1 and Jean-Michel Dogné2,3
Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD)-deficient patients might only become aware of their genotype after
exposure to dihydropyrimidines, if testing is performed. Case reports to pharmacovigilance databases might
only contain phenotypical manifestations of DPD, without information on the genotype. This poses a difficulty in
estimating the cases due to DPD. Auto machine learning models were developed to train patterns of phenotypical
manifestations of toxicity, which were then used as a surrogate to estimate the number of cases of DPD-related
toxicity. Results indicate that between 8,878 (7.0%) and 16,549 (13.1%) patients have a profile similar to DPD
deficient status. Results of the analysis of variable importance match the known end-organ damage of DPD-related
toxicity, however, accuracies in the range of 90% suggest presence of overfitting, thus, results need to be interpreted
carefully. This study shows the potential for use of machine learning in the regulatory context but additional studies
are required to better understand regulatory applicability.
Study Highlights
WHAT IS THE CURRENT KNOWLEDGE ON THE
TOPIC?
 The true proportion of cases of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD)-deficient individuals with adverse reactions to
fluoropyrimidines reported to pharmacovigilance databases is
not estimable using traditional methods.
WHAT QUESTION DID THIS STUDY ADDRESS?
 This study aimed at providing an estimate of the proportion of
patients that might have susceptibility to fluoropyrimidine toxicity
due to DPD deficiency. In essence, this is an imputation exercise,
using machine learning models to classify likely DPD genotype.

WHAT DOES THIS STUDY ADD TO OUR KNOWLEDGE?
 Machine learning models can assist in imputing likely genotype from phenotypical manifestations. The results allow a better understanding of the influence of DPD deficiency in reports
of adverse drug reactions.
HOW MIGHT THIS CHANGE CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OR TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE?
 Machine learning models applied to large pharmacovigilance databases can help answer certain research questions,
which were difficult to address with more traditional methods.

Fluorouracil (5-FU) is a fluoropyrimidine anticancer drug that
has been used in the treatment of solid tumors for decades.1
About 10% of patients taking 5-FU undergoes renal excretion, whereas over 80% are cleared by catabolic degradation.
Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) is the initial and
rate-limiting enzyme in the catabolism of 5-FU. 2 Many variants of the DPYD gene, which encodes for DPD, have been described, however, only a few have been shown to lead to absent
or reduced enzyme activity.3
Although most individuals with partial DPD deficiency unexposed to fluoropyrimidines do not exhibit obvious symptoms, infants with severe DPD deficiency may have neurological problems,
such as recurrent seizures, intellectual disability, microcephaly,

hypertonia, and autistic behaviors, among others. All patients with
DPD deficiency, regardless of whether they show any symptoms,
are susceptible to serious, sometimes fatal adverse reactions, on exposure to fluoropyrimidines. Fluoropyrimidine toxicity in partial
DPD-deficient individuals may manifest as severe mucositis, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, hemorrhage, hand-foot syndrome,
diarrhea, dyspnea, and alopecia.4,5 The prevalence of DPD deficiency seems to be dependent on race and sex. African American
women showed the highest prevalence of DPD deficiency compared with African American men, white women, and white men
(12.3%, 4.0%, 3.5%, and 1.9%, respectively).6
Low or absent DPD activity can lead to fluoropyrimidine-associated toxicity, which occurs in about 30% of treated patients

1

European Medicines Agency, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 2University of Namur, Namur, Belgium; 3Belgian Federal Agency for Medicines and Health
Products, Brussels, Belgium. *Correspondence: Luis Correia Pinheiro (luis.pinheiro@ema.europa.eu)
Received September 16, 2019; accepted January 3, 2020. doi:10.1002/cpt.1789
944

CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 107 NUMBER 4 | April 2020

ARTICLE
with 0.5–1% having fatal treatment-related toxicity.7,8 However,
adverse drug reactions (ADRs) to 5-FU and related substances (capecitabine, tegafur, and flucytosine) can also occur in
non-DPD-deficient patients.
In March 2019, the French regulatory authority (ANSM) notified
the European Medicines Agency’s (EMA) Pharmacovigilance Risk
Assessment Committee of a referral under Article 31 of Directive
2001/83/EC.9 The referral involved a review of available data on
screening methods to detect DPD deficiency with the aim of recommending changes to ensure the safe use of 5-FU and related drugs.
In the context of this referral, an analysis of data in the
EudraVigilance (EV) database was performed to estimate the number (or proportion) of individual case safety reports (ICSRs) to fluorouracil and related substances that might have been due to DPD
deficiency.
EV is the system for collecting, managing, and analyzing suspected
ADRs to medicines authorized in the European Economic Area
(EEA). By the end of 2017, the EV held a total of 7,948,873 individual cases. Of the cases submitted in a postauthorization setting, 64%
were submitted from outside the EEA and 36% from EEA countries.
Thus, the EV provides a rich dataset with global representation.10
The traditional approach to estimating counts of an ADR
is to develop a case definition using the Medical Dictionary for
Regulatory Activities (MedDRA).11 MedDRA (version 21.1)
has a preferred term for “Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency.” However, it is anticipated that it would only be used in patients with known DPD deficiency at the time of reporting, which
is not always the case. A standardized MedDRA query would have
been helpful to extract information and act as a de facto case definition,12 however, there is none for DPD-related toxicities.
A potential alternative to developing a time-consuming consensus-based case definition is to use machine learning models.
Supervised classification machine learning models can help identify complex relationships in the variables (or features) and assign a
probabilistic classification to each observation.13
By using the phenotypical manifestations (i.e., the adverse
events associated with 5-FU and derivatives) we hypothesize that
we might be able to classify the likely genotype of the patient. To
the best of our knowledge, this is a novel approach to classifying
cases in pharmacovigilance databases, but the use of novel methods to build bespoke case definitions has been attempted before.14
In this study, multivariable prediction models were developed
and validated. The resulting models were applied to case reports of
5-FU and derivatives. With all patients classified it became possible to estimate the number of ADRs where the patients are likely
DPD deficient.

Classification in the training set
This study was a two-class classification problem, where cases were classified as likely DPD deficient (true positives) and likely not DPD deficient
(true negatives). Cases were classified as DPD deficient (true positives)
where the MedDRA term “dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency” was reported as a reaction, or medical history, or a test result was
reported, suggestive of DPD deficiency.
There were very few cases of individuals where normal DPD activity
is reported as such in the database (i.e., DPD laboratory testing reported
in the case did not suggest deficiency). Thus, likely non-DPD-deficient
cases were defined as case reports of medicinal products used in similar
indications as fluorouracil and fluorouracil-related substances, but which
do not have a DPD interaction. Trastuzumab, pembrolizumab, docetaxel,
and irinotecan were used. Non-DPD-deficient cases were randomly selected on a 1:4 relation. This means that for each DPD-deficient case, four
non-DPD-deficient cases were assigned.
Non-DPD-deficient cases that also reported exposure to fluorouracil or
related products were removed from the sample, except if they were known
to be DPD deficient (i.e., it was reported in the case).
Considering that the sample defined the distribution of the classes is
imbalanced (i.e., 20% DPD-deficient and 80% non-DPD-deficient), the
classes were balanced in the machine learning model. The auto machine
learning model does this algorithmically, and includes a blend of undersampling the majority class and resampling the minority class.
Training, validation, and testing set
The data were partitioned in a 75% training set and a 25% test set. Fivefold cross-validation was performed in the training set.
Features
The features (or variables) used were age, sex, and adverse reaction reported at high level term. The high level term with the preferred term
“Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency” was excluded as it is
highly correlated with DPD deficiency.
Analytics
Auto machine learning was applied using H2O for R. Distributed random forests, gradient boosting machines, and generalized linear models
(GLMs) were included. H2O is an open source lightweight in-memory
machine learning platform written in Java.15
RESULTS

Exposure
The exposure was defined as use of fluorouracil and fluorouracil-related
substances, namely capecitabine, fluorouracil, tegafur, and flucytosine
containing medicinal products.

As of March 15, 2019, there were a total of 126,890 ICSRs in EV
with capecitabine, fluorouracil, tegafur, or flucytosine containing
medicinal products reported as suspect, interacting, or concomitant.
DPD deficiency could be ascertained in 260 cases: 184 had information in the medical history, 76 in the reaction field, and 3 in the
laboratory tests fields (some cases fulfilled more than one criterion).
The models were trained in a data frame containing 1,185 observations and 434 features. The five most accurate trained models had an accuracy that ranged between 0.8855 and 0.9192. The
model with the best accuracy had a precision of 0.9331 and a specificity of 0.6792 (Table 1).
When the models were applied to the 126,630 cases without established DPD deficiency, the estimate of cases possibly due to DPD
deficiency ranged from 8,878 (7.0%) to 16,549 (13.1%) (Table 2).
Gradient boosting machine (GBM) models, contrary to ensemble or GLMs, provide information on the relative importance of
the features. Eight of the top 10 most important features in the 2
GBM models are the same (Table 3).

CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 107 NUMBER 4 | April 2020

945

METHODS
Data
The data were sourced from the European Union’s central database of
reports of suspected ADRs, EV. The period of interest was from the start
of data collection to March 15, 2019.

ARTICLE
Table 1 Performance metrics, at a probabilistic threshold of 50%, for the validation (i.e., test set) for the top five models,
ranked by accuracy
Model identification

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

Specificity

Stacked ensemble best of family

0.9192

0.9331

0.9713

0.6792

Stacked ensemble all models

0.9125

0.9325

0.9631

0.6792

GBM grid 1 model 12

0.8990

0.9385

0.9385

0.7170

GBM grid 1 model 13

0.8956

0.9019

0.9795

0.5094

GLM grid 1 model 1

0.8855

0.9038

0.9631

0.5283

GBM, gradient boosting machine; GLM, generalized linear model.

Table 2 Estimate of the number of cases likely to be related
to DPD deficiency, for the top five models, ranked by model
accuracy
Estimate of cases
N (%)

Model identification
Stacked ensemble all models

8,878 (7.0)

Stacked ensemble best of family

16,549 (13.1)

GBM grid 1 model 12

14,604 (11.5)

GBM grid 1 model 13

10,944 (8.6)

GLM grid 1 model 1

11,432 (9.0)

DPD, dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase; GBM, gradient boosting machine;
GLM, generalized linear model.

Table 3 Variable importance for the GBM models, showing
top 10 most important features
Model identification

Features

GBM grid 1 model 12

HLT Mucosal findings abnormal
Age
HLT Poisoning and toxicity
HLT Marrow depression and hypoplastic
anemias
HLT Stomatitis and ulceration
Sex
HLT Thrombocytopenias
HLT Diarrhea (excluding infective)
HLT Neutropenias
HLT Dermatitis ascribed to specific agent

GBM grid 1 model 13

HLT Mucosal findings abnormal
HLT Poisoning and toxicity
HLT Diarrhea (excluding infective)
Age
HLT Marrow depression and hypoplastic
anemias
HLT Leukopenias
HLT Thrombocytopenias
HLT Dermatitis ascribed to specific agent
HLT Stomatitis and ulceration
HLT Neutropenias

GBM, gradient boosting machine; HLT, high level term.

DISCUSSION

The auto machine learning models suggest that between 7% and
13% of the cases of toxicity with 5-FU and derivatives in the EV
database might be due to DPD deficiency. This estimate is very
close to the 2–12% estimate of the general population that may
be vulnerable to toxic reactions to fluoropyrimidine drugs due to
DPD deficiency 4.
946

Furthermore, the features of highest importance, as highlighted
by the gradient boosting machine models, are closely related to
the typical manifestations of DPD-related toxicity, namely mucosal problems, diarrhea, thrombocytopenia, and skin reactions.
Furthermore, sex appears in one model as an important feature,
which is in line with the known sex imbalance in DPD deficiency (i.e., female sex seems to have higher prevalence of DPD
deficiency).
This result could be read as the models identifying correctly the
main manifestations of DPD-related toxicity. It is reassuring regarding the wider validity of the models, as the important features of the
models are not at odds with the known pattern for the disease.
Of note, descriptive analyses run in parallel using an ad hoc case
definition aimed at capturing all reactions within the spectrum of
possible DPD-related toxicity yielded an estimate of 33.9% of cases
(data not shown).
As this was a novel application of machine learning models to
reach an overall estimate of counts of cases, the use of auto machine
learning models, whereby the iterative model building and hyperparameter tuning is automated—was considered sufficient. The
best performing models were stacked ensemble models (i.e., models based on a combination of machine learning models). These
are known to have better predictive abilities than individual models and the results support that. However, these models come at a
cost of interpretation; GBM models provide information on variable importance and GLMs provide the variable coefficients but
stacked ensembles do not provide easily interpretable information
on variable importance. In this study, having insights into variable
importance is useful in understanding the validity of the models.
Machine learning models learn patterns (or correlations), therefore, it is not adequate to assume causal relationships from these
results. Models identify patterns even in the sample error space—
also known as overfitting. The feature age, for instance, may solely
indicate a higher risk of having a malignant disease or general pharmacokinetic changes and not a specific DPD relationship.
Furthermore, considering the simplicity of the features used and
complexity of the prediction problem, the performance metrics,
with accuracies around 90%, might suggest some overfitting. To improve validity of the models, a set of oncology drugs—two biologicals and two small molecule products—which do not have a DPD
metabolic pathway were chosen. It is possible that the safety profiles
of these are so distinct from that of fluoropyrimidines that it leads
to overfitting.
In addition, although a selection of a 1:4 ratio of DPD deficient
to non-DPD deficient case reports was made, the models chosen
VOLUME 107 NUMBER 4 | April 2020 | www.cpt-journal.com

ARTICLE
balanced the classes by oversampling from the minority class and
undersampling from the majority class.
Estimating the number of patients likely to be DPD deficient
but otherwise asymptomatic is a particularly difficult topic regardless of the methodology chosen. The pathological mechanism is
through reduced clearance of fluoropyrimidines and, thus, manifestations are similar in DPD-deficient and nondeficient patients.
In addition, they also overlap with the adverse reaction profile of
other oncologic products.
The hypothesis for this study was that a pattern or combination of manifestations could potentially be characteristic of DPDrelated toxicity. A cautious interpretation is that machine learning
models indicate that 7–13% of all case reports to fluoropyrimidines have an adverse reaction profile similar to that reported in
DPD-deficient patients. This frequency is within the range of
prevalence of DPD deficiency and the variable importance follows
the expected profile of the reaction and sex imbalances.
From a regulatory point of view, this study provides a good
example in one of the key areas of the EMA’s regulatory strategy
of exploiting artificial intelligence in regulatory decision making
16
and is the first time that machine learning is used as a pharmacovigilance approach in estimating the number and proportion of
ICSRs with a drug that might have been due to a genotype deficiency, notably in the absence of information on the DPD status
in the narrative. This will surely help the scientific assessors in estimating the level of the risk and identify proportional risk minimizations strategies of toxicity with 5-FU and derivatives. It is
anticipated that such a method will be validated with other examples in the EV database and may be used to provide rapid and reliable estimates as part of other safety procedures, including signal
management and continuous monitoring of drug safety.
The European regulatory system is scientifically robust, and
coordination of pharmacovigilance activities by the EMA is determinant for safety monitoring of medicines across Europe. While existing methods are well established, this study illustrates how, taking
into account their limitations, the use of machine learning models
for case definition in pharmacovigilance may provide additional insights that strengthen the evidence base for decision making.

reflecting the position of the agencies or organizations with which the
authors are affiliated.
© 2020 European Medicines Agency. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics
published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Society for
Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use, distribution and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and
is not used for commercial purposes.

DISCLAIMER
The views expressed in this paper are the personal views of the authors
and may not be understood or quoted as being made on behalf of or

1. Wilson, W.L. Chemotherapy of human solid tumors with
5-fluorouracil. Cancer 13, 1230–1239 (1960).
2. Iyer, L. & Ratain, M.J. 5-fluorouracil pharmacokinetics: causes for
variability and strategies for modulation in cancer chemotherapy.
Cancer Invest. 17, 494–506 (1999).
3. Murphy, C. et al. Cost implications of reactive versus prospective
testing for dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency in patients
with colorectal cancer: a single-institution experience. Dose
Response 16, 1–6 (2018).
4. Ezzeldin, H. & Diasio, R. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
deficiency, a pharmacogenetic syndrome associated with
potentially life-threatening toxicity following 5-fluorouracil
administration. Clin. Colorectal Cancer 4, 181–189 (2004).
5. Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center Dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase deficiency <https​://rared​iseas​es.info.nih.gov/
disea​ses/19/dihyd​ropyr​imidi​ne-dehyd​rogen​ase-defic​iency​>.
Accessed September 15, 2019.
6. Mattison, L.K. et al. Increased prevalence of dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase deficiency in African-Americans compared with
Caucasians. Clin. Cancer Res. 12, 5491–5495 (2006).
7. van Kuilenburg, A.B. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase and the
efficacy and toxicity of 5-fluorouracil. Eur. J. Cancer 40, 939–950
(2004).
8. Mikhail, S.E., Sun, J.F. & Marshall, J.L. Safety of capecitabine: a
review. Expert Opin. Drug Saf. 9, 831–841 (2010).
9. European Medicines Agency Fluorouracil and fluorouracil related
substances (capecitabine, tegafur and flucytosine) containing
medicinal products <https​://www.ema.europa.eu/en/medic​ines/
human/​refer​rals/fluor​ourac​il-fluor​ourac​il-relat​ed-subst​ancescapec​itabi​ne-tegaf​ur-flucy ​tosine-conta​ining-medic​inal> (2019).
Accessed September 15, 2019.
10. Postigo, R. et al. EudraVigilance medicines safety database:
publicly accessible data for research and public health protection.
Drug Saf. 41, 665–675 (2018).
11. Meddra.org MedDRA|Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
<http://www.meddra.org/> (2015). Accessed September 15,
2019.
12. Mozzicato, P. Standardised MedDRA queries. Drug Saf. 30,
617–619 (2007).
13. Sidey-Gibbons, J.A.M. & Sidey-Gibbons, C.J. Machine learning in
medicine: a practical introduction. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 19,
64 (2019).
14. Lethebe, B.C. et al. Developing a case definition for type 1
diabetes mellitus in a primary care electronic medical record
database: an exploratory study. C. Open 7, E246–E251 (2019).
15. H2O. Open source leader in AI and ML <https​://www.h2o.ai/>.
Accessed September 15, 2019.
16. European Medicines Agency. EMA regulatory science to 2025—
strategic reflection <https​://www.ema.europa.eu/en/docum​ents/
regul​atory-proce​dural-guide​line/ema-regul​atory​scien​ce-2025-strat​
egic-refle​ction_en.pdf> (2018).

CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY & THERAPEUTICS | VOLUME 107 NUMBER 4 | April 2020

947

FUNDING
No funding was received for this work.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
All authors declared no competing interests for this work.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors wrote the manuscript. L.C.P. designed the research. L.C.P.
performed the research. All authors analyzed the data.

