Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 25(10), 2018, 1311–1321
doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocy097
Advance Access Publication Date: 30 July 2018
Research and Applications

Research and Applications

A chronological pharmacovigilance network analytics
approach for predicting adverse drug events
Behrooz Davazdahemami1 and Dursun Delen2
1

Department of Management Science and Information Systems, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA, and
Department of Management Science and Information Systems, Center for Health Systems Innovation, Oklahoma State
University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA
2

Corresponding Author: Behrooz Davazdahemami, PhD, Department of Management Science and Information Systems,
Oklahoma State University, 449 BUSINESS, Stillwater, OK 74078, USA (davazda@okstate.edu)
Received 13 February 2018; Revised 18 April 2018; Editorial Decision 27 June 2018; Accepted 29 June 2018

ABSTRACT
Objectives: This study extends prior research by combining a chronological pharmacovigilance network approach with machine-learning (ML) techniques to predict adverse drug events (ADEs) based on the drugs’ similarities in terms of the proteins they target in the human body. The focus of this research, though, is particularly
centered on predicting the drug-ADE associations for a set of 8 common and high-risk ADEs.
Materials and methods: large collection of annotated MEDLINE biomedical articles was used to construct a
drug-ADE network, and the network was further equipped with information about drugs’ target proteins. Several network metrics were extracted and used as predictors in ML algorithms to predict the existence of network
edges (ie, associations or relationships).
Results: Gradient boosted trees (GBTs) as an ensemble ML algorithm outperformed other prediction methods
in identifying the drug-ADE associations with an overall accuracy of 92.8% on the validation sample. The prediction model was able to predict drug-ADE associations, on average, 3.84 years earlier than they were actually
mentioned in the biomedical literature.
Conclusion: While network analysis and ML techniques were used in separation in prior ADE studies, our
results showed that they, in combination with each other, can boost the power of one another and predict better. Moreover, our results highlight the superior capability of ensemble-type ML methods in capturing drugADE patterns compared to the regular (ie, singular), ML algorithms.
Key words: adverse drug events, network analysis, machine learning, prediction, target proteins, ensemble models

INTRODUCTION
Today, every new drug to be approved by healthcare authorities and
marketed by pharmaceutical companies has to pass through numerous clinical trials, which on average take 10 to 15 years.1 These clinical trials aim mainly at ensuring efficacy and safety of the drug. A
considerable number of drugs fail to get US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval due to the potential threats their usage
involves, even though they might show effectiveness with regard to
treating some specific diseases.2 Nevertheless, even such tough regulations and approval procedures do not 100% guarantee the safety of a

drug, as those trials themselves involve several limitations and may fail
to capture some potential—in some cases, serious—safety issues.3,4
A classic example of such cases is Rofecoxib, a non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug approved in 1999 that became highly welcomed by physicians in a short time. The drug was originally aimed
to treat acute pains and osteoarthritis, but after a while turned out
to cause heart attacks in more than 100 000 patients and ended up
being withdrawn by the FDA in 2004. During that time, apart from
the lives threatened, this possibly avoidable problem also imposed
huge losses to pharmaceutical and insurance companies.

C The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Medical Informatics Association.
V

All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com

1311

1312

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2018, Vol. 25, No. 10

Pharmacovigilance (a.k.a. drug safety surveillance) is a field of
science that monitors the drugs during their lifecycle to detect, assess, and understand their potential adverse effects and prevent
harm and injuries caused thereof. Although pharmacovigilance activities begin early after drug discovery, its role becomes more critical after drug approval, when humans start to take it.
In pharmacovigilance terminology, an adverse drug event (ADE)
refers to any injury occurring to a patient caused by administering a
drug. It should be noted that there is still no consensus on this terminology across pharmacovigilance and pharmacoepidemiology studies. Some studies2,4–6 define ADE as any injury that does not
necessarily have a causal relationship with the drug (eg, injuries due
to human errors) and therefore use the more specific term adverse
drug reaction (ADR) to refer to the injuries directly caused by the
drug. However, in the present study, we stick with the term ADE,
while we emphasize that by ADE, we mean a drug-induced (ie, causally related) injury in patients. It is estimated that in the United
States, each ADE case in community hospitals on average costs
$3000.3,4 Also, ADEs are reported by the Australian Commission
on Safety and Quality in HealthCare (ACSQHC) to cause about
400 000 admissions to general practitioners in Australia with a population of only 23 million.3
Given the great potential health and financial threats mentioned,
and considering the fact that today the trend is toward faster approval processes and smaller clinical trials, especially in oncology
and rare diseases,2 a great amount of research has been done in the
past decade to find faster and more effective ways to detect, predict,
understand, and prevent ADEs before they affect too many (or ideally any) people.
In this study, we extend the extant literature on ADE prediction
by proposing a chronological network analytics approach that can
help pharmacovigilance practitioners save lots of time, money, and,
more importantly, lives by enabling them to predict potential ADEs
prior to drug approval. The proposed approach uses historical information of known drug-ADE relationships in addition to similarities
between new and approved drugs, in terms of the proteins they target in human bodies, and tries to predict potential ADEs.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows: the following section reviews the extant literature on detection, prediction,
and understanding of ADEs and states the research goals. Then, we
explain the materials and methods used to conduct the study followed by the results. Finally, we discuss the contributions of our
study and conclude with a few potential future research directions.

BACKGROUND
Resources for ADE studies
Before discussing different approaches used in prior ADE studies, in
this section, we discuss various data sources used by researchers to
conduct those studies. Four main types of data sources have been
identified in the literature. The following 4 sub-sections introduce
these resources and mention prior research conducted using each.

Spontaneous reporting systems
As an effort to rapidly detect and prevent ADEs in the postmarketing phase, many countries and international organizations
have run spontaneous reporting systems (SRSs)—systems designed
to allow patients and professionals to submit their reports of suspected ADEs. This includes the World Health Organization’s
(WHO) Individual Case Safety Reports (ICSR) database, the yellow

card system of Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency (MHRA) in the UK, and the FDA Adverse Event Reporting
System (FAERS) in the United States.3 Although SRSs were the main
source for ADE studies for several years, their limitations such as
over-reporting and voluntary submissions3,7 made pharmacovigilance practitioners look for more efficient alternatives.
Electronic health records
During the past decade, electronic health records (EHR) have been
widely used in the healthcare industry to help practitioners in the
collection, storage, and tracking of patients’ information. The vast
amount of data collected by EHRs along with their increasing availability have made them interesting resources for pharmacovigilance
researchers and enabled them to detect ADE signals closer to real
time.8 Yet, using EHR data involves challenges such as complex
data preprocessing requirements and multiple standards across different databases.7
Social media
Recently, social media have been introduced as novel resources for
conducting ADE as well as other healthcare studies. Virtual communities such as health forums (eg, DailyStrength and PatientsLikeMe)
and social networks (eg, Twitter and Facebook) are places where
people discuss their daily health-related experiences and concerns.
Such information, although noisy, is likely to appear there long before it is reported to any SRS or recorded in any her,9,10 and this has
made social media precious resources for early detection of ADEs.
Biomedical literature
Recently, researchers have realized biomedical literature as well as
chemical and biological databases as feature-rich sources for ADE
studies. Databases such as PubMed, PubChem, KEGG, and DrugBank are rich sources of information about drugs, their chemical
and biological characteristics, and their identified ADEs.

ADE studies: detection, prediction, and understanding
Due to considerable potential costs and damages of ADEs, in the
past decades, there has been a great deal of research on this issue in
many disciplines, including pharmacology, economics, and information systems. While the ultimate goal of all of these studies is to
identify drugs’ potential ADEs and prevent losses of lives and money
thereof, they pursue different tools and strategies to achieve that
goal. We believe that ADE studies can be classified into 3 distinct
categories, namely, detection, prediction, and understanding.
Detection studies are the largest group of ADE research works
focused on finding new and undetected ADE signals (ie, associations, not necessarily causal) between the existent drugs (already in
the market) and adverse events. The signals detected by these studies
need to be assessed and verified by clinical trials. ADE detection
studies heavily rely on applying statistical11,12 or data mining5–8,13–16
methods and quasi-experimental settings to the historical data from
SRSs,7,11,12,17 EHRs,6,8,14,15,18 or social media5,13,16,19,20 to extract
signals from them.
In the ADE prediction studies, on the other hand, instead of
detecting signals for the existent drugs using collected data from
their past usage experiences, the focus is on creating signals for the
new drugs before they cause any adverse events to patients. The
strategy in this group of studies is mainly to find similarities between
the existent and the new drugs and thereby to predict ADEs for the
new drugs given the already known relationships between their

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2018, Vol. 25, No. 10

similar existent drugs with the corresponding ADEs. The statistical
regression-based methods21,22 as well as machine-learning (ML)
techniques23–25 are the dominant methods used by researchers for
this purpose. Also, in terms of data sources, prediction studies heavily
rely on the biomedical literature as well as drug databases, including
chemical, physical, and biological information of drugs, as such
resources enable them to identify drug similarities. Just like ADE detection studies, this group of studies also serves as a signal detector,
but the difference is they capture signals for new drugs as well.
The last group of ADE studies in our taxonomy is those focusing
on verifying ADE signals and understanding the mechanism through
which the drug causes the ADE. Pharmacoepidemiology and pharmacometrics studies fall into this group, as they use mathematical
and parametric models of biology, pharmacology, and physiology to
clarify and understand mechanisms of both beneficial and adverse
molecular interactions.2 Several different types of models have been
used by researchers in this group, among which pharmakokinetics
and pharmacodynamics26–30 are the most popular modeling
approaches. The former focuses on modeling how the organism
affects the drug, whereas the focus in the latter is on studying the effect of the drug on the organism; so the researchers usually employ
them together, as the complement to each other to determine optimal dosing as well as the beneficial and adverse effects of drugs. In
terms of data sources, this group of studies mostly relies on drug
databases and EHR historical transactions.

Network analysis and pharmacovigilance
Although network analysis (NA) has been widely used in many areas
of science, including sociology, communication, biology, economics,
and computer science starting from a few decades ago, its application in pharmacovigilance studies is hardly older than 10 years. The
main reason for that could be the lack of appropriate information
systems and infrastructures for collecting the data required for constructing networks in large scale before the early 2000s.
Networks have been used in pharmacovigilance research with a
variety of data sources and for different purposes (not limited to ADE
prediction, which is the case in our study). Some researchers, including
Ball et al31 and Botsis et al,32 used network representations of vaccines
and their reported ADEs in the FDA’s VAERS to identify the frequent
patterns of interactions. Also Zhang et al33 showed that patterns identified in vaccine–vaccine networks can contribute to the vaccine ontology knowledge base. A recent study by Kim et al34 on hospitalized
patients with hematologic malignancies revealed that network centrality metrics can be used to identify the most important causes for drugrelated problems (DRPs) by constructing a cause-DRP network using
ward pharmacists’ documentations in hospital settings.
Apart from the mentioned studies that have used descriptive and
qualitative techniques to extract information/knowledge from networks, there are also a few studies focused on using networks of drugs
and ADEs for predicting their associations. For instance, Atias and
Sharan22 and Cami et al21 in their studies used a diffusion process and
a logistic regression model, respectively, with NA to make ADE predictions. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, NA has not been
combined with ML methods in the literature so far for the prediction
purposes, and the present study is the first one to do so.

Research goals
While statistical and ML techniques have been widely used with various data sources for pharmacovigilance prediction purposes,19,25,35–38 we found only a few studies that have utilized the

1313

incredible potential of network analysis approaches to explore drugADE associations. Specifically, Atias and Sharan22 applied a
network-based diffusion process to predict drugs’ ADEs. Also, in a
later study, Cami et al21 employed a logistic regression (LR) technique in a network approach using data from biomedical literature
and chemical databases to predict drug-ADE associations.
We extend the ADE prediction research by employing a chronological pharmacovigilance network (CPN) along with machinelearning techniques to predict drugs’ ADEs. For this purpose, we use
biomedical literature citations as the main source of data for extracting previously identified drug-ADE associations. Additionally, we
incorporate information about the target proteins of drugs into our
network structure to make it more informative for training machinelearning algorithms.
A target protein is a chemically definable molecular structure
that will undergo a specific interaction with chemicals that we call
drugs because they are administered to treat or diagnose a disease.39
In other words, drugs act by binding to specific target proteins and
changing their biochemical or biophysical activities to treat their indicated diseases.40 Given that, we argue that knowledge about the
similarity of drugs, in terms of the proteins they target, can contribute to the quality of ADE predictions. Moreover, we believe that the
complexity of drug-ADE relationships is so much that machinelearning algorithms, and especially ensemble models, are more efficient than statistical-based methods (eg, LR) in capturing that.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
We integrated data from 2 sources, namely, National Library of
Medicine’s (NLM) MEDLINE and the DrugBank’s database of
drug-target proteins, in order to operationalize our approach towards modeling of the CPN. MEDLINE, a subset of the PubMed
database, is a bibliographic database of biomedical information
from multiple disciplines that includes more than 29M citations
starting from 1946. What sets MEDLINE apart from the rest of
PubMed is the added value of using the NLM-controlled vocabulary, Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), for indexing, cataloging,
and searching for biomedical documents. Also, DrugBank is a freely
accessible online drug database, including biological, chemical, and
genetic information of 10 986 approved and experimental drugs.
First, we selected a sample of 8 common and high-risk ADEs
reported in the literature8 (acute renal failure, myocardial infarction,
leukopenia, agranulocytosis, rhabdomyolysis, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia) and collected all MEDLINE articles mentioning at least 1 of them as the ADE identified in the article. To this
end, we used a search strategy based on NLM’s MeSH thesaurus
(see the Appendix). NLM indexers select the most appropriate
MeSH indexes to resume the full content of an article after reading
the full text.41
The initially downloaded dataset involved 10 890 unique publications mentioning associations among 657 drugs with 769 ADEs.
However, considering only drugs approved by the FDA by December 2017, we ended up with a dataset including 9672 publications,
582 drugs, and 732 ADEs (ie, the 8 original high-risk ADEs as well
as 724 others that were mentioned in the included articles).
Second, we used the DrugBank42 database to extract target proteins associated with each FDA-approved drug. While most drugs
target only a few proteins in the human body, some have many targets.40 In addition to the 582 drugs in the initial dataset, we included

1314

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2018, Vol. 25, No. 10

information about 217 other drugs having at least 1 common target
with 1 of those 582 drugs. Therefore, the integrated dataset used in
the study involved 799 approved drugs and 732 ADEs. The publication years as well as the drugs approval dates were also imported
into our data to be used in constructing training and validation datasets for the model-building stage. All of the drugs and ADEs were
then mapped to their unique terms from the NLM’s Unified Medical
Language System (UMLS) for consistency.

Method
Network construction
A chronological approach was employed to construct drug-drug and
drug-ADE relationships in the network. The ultimate goal in pharmacovigilance is to identify as many as possible ADEs in the premarketing phase. Hence, in order to have a valid prediction model,
one is allowed to use only drug information as well as the known
drug-ADE associations that are available prior to the time of the
drug approval. Given this idea and using the dates of publications
and drug approvals, we used all of the information available prior to
2001 to predict drug-ADE associations for the drugs marketed during 2001 to 2017.
First, a network was constructed in which both drugs and ADEs
were considered as vertices. An undirected edge was created between 2 drugs if they had at least 1 common target protein. Additionally, a drug was connected to an ADE in the network if there
was at least 1 PubMed article published before 2001 mentioning
such association. The network involved all of the 799 drug vertices
(regardless of their approval dates) and 10 094 drug-drug edges indicating common target proteins, as well as 5264 drug-ADE edges representing pre-2001 identified associations. We kept aside drug-ADE
relationships recognized (for the first time) during 2001 to 2017 to
validate our prediction model, as they were unknown at the time of
prediction (ie, beginning of 2001). Figure 1 provides a visualization
of the network created.
Network metrics
Drug-ADE links were considered as the unit of analysis in this study.
Since the focus of our study was on a set of 8 common and critical
ADEs, we created our dataset by considering all possible combinations of the 799 drugs with those ADEs (ie, 6392 records). Once the
network was constructed, we extracted 7 similarity- as well as 3
centrality-based metrics for each record to be used as link predictors.
The metrics had been proposed in the network analysis literature for
link prediction purposes.21,43,44
The 3 centrality-based metrics we used were the absolute difference, product, and sum of degree centralities of corresponding drug
and ADE vertices involved in each link. All of these metrics were
used in similar studies21,43 to capture assortativity1 (absolute difference and ratio) and preferential attachment2 (sum and product).
Table 1 indicates the similarity-based predictors extracted from
the network along with their definitions. While all of the similarity
metrics are defined based on the notion of commonality of neighborhoods between the 2 nodes of interest, each reflects a different aspect of similarity. In these definitions, C(i) and Di denote the set of

neighbors and degree of node i, respectively. Also, d and a were
used to denote drug and ADE, respectively. Therefore, CðdÞ \ CðaÞ
refers to the set of common neighbors of a drug and an ADE;
similarly, CðdÞ [ CðaÞ refers to the set of all of their neighbors.
The network metrics were obtained with the help of the igraph
package in R, a comprehensive package for network analysis.
Apart from the 5 mentioned standard similarity metrics, we also
incorporated 2 derived similarity metrics for each drug-ADE pair.
First, for each drug-ADE pair, we calculated the average Jaccard
similarity of the corresponding drug with all of the drugs connected
to the ADE. To calculate this variable we constructed and used a
network including only the drugs (and no ADEs) and extracted Jaccard similarities of each drug with all of those connected drugs. We
believe that such a variable reflects how a new drug is chemically
similar to drugs in general and therefore might cause the same ADE
as they do. Based on the same logic and in a similar manner, for
each drug-ADE pair in our dataset, we also incorporated average
distance from the corresponding drug to all of the drugs connected
to the ADE (ie, the second derived variable). While the first derived
variable captures general similarity of each drug with the connected
drugs based on their direct neighborhoods, the second one takes into
account the indirect links as well.
In the end, a binary target variable was created for each drugADE pair to indicate whether that association actually exists according to the MEDLINE citations.
Training and validation data
Once we formed the dataset using the network, we applied the following rules to divide the dataset into training and validation subsets to train the prediction models and test their efficiency.
Drug-ADE pairs that were actually discovered after 2001, regardless of the drug approval year, were placed into the validation
dataset. All of the remaining pairs, including drugs approved after
2001, were also added to the validation set. All other pairs were
classified as the training dataset. Applying these rules, we ended up
with a training dataset containing 5357 records with 1087 (ie,
20.3%) positive responses (target ¼ 1). Also, the validation set contained 1035 records with a response rate of 14.6% (ie, 151 positives).
Prediction model
We used the training dataset to train and build our prediction models. Four different classification algorithms were employed, namely,
artificial neural network (ANN), gradient boosted trees (GBTs), random forests (RFs), and LR.
Due to the unbalanced proportion of positive and negative
responses in training data, the synthetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE)50 was applied to make a balanced training (modelbuilding dataset), henceforth avoiding biases in the training of the
models. The KNIME analytics platform version 3.5.1 (a free and
open source analytics software platform) was used to build the classification models. Figure 2 shows a flowchart-like graphical depiction of the data preparation and model-building methods and
procedures.

1 Assortativity is defined as the extent to which highly central drugs
tend to connect more frequently to high- or low-central ADEs.21
2 Preferential attachment denotes that the probability that a new edge
has a specific node x as an endpoint is proportional to the current
number of neighbors of x.43

RESULTS
Models accuracy
Table 2 shows the prediction results of the best models of each algorithm on the validation data. As shown, RF and GBT, the 2

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2018, Vol. 25, No. 10

1315

Figure 1. Drug-ADE network created by Cytoscape v3.6. Triangle (blue) nodes represent drugs, and circular (orange) nodes represent ADEs. Yellow links between
drugs indicate the existence of at least one common target protein by the drugs connected. Also, gray links between drugs and ADEs indicate an association
mentioned in at least one PubMed article for the corresponding drug and ADE.

Table 1. Similarity metrics and their formulaic definitions
Similarity index
Jaccard coefficient

Definition/Formula
jCðdÞ\CðaÞj
jCðdÞ[CðaÞj

45

2jCðdÞ\CðaÞj
Dd þDa

Dice index46
Adamic/Adar index47

P

1
z CðdÞ\CðaÞ logjCðzÞj

Simpson index48

jCðdÞ\CðaÞj
MinðDd ;Da Þ

Geometric index49

jCðdÞ\CðaÞj2
Dd Da

ensemble-type algorithms, provided more accurate results than
ANN and LR.3 Also, overall, GBT turned out to be the best model
among all with an overall accuracy of 92.8% and the ability to correctly predict 72.8% of real drug-ADE associations in the validation
data (ie, sensitivity). It suggests that given historical information
about drug-ADE associations as well the target proteins of drugs,
our best model was able to predict 110/151 (ie, 72.8%) of drugADE associations that were actually discovered during a 17-year period after building the prediction network. In addition, the positive
predictive value (PPV) for the GBT model indicates that out of 143
pairs predicted as associations by this model, 110 (ie, 76.9%) were
real associations reported in MEDLINE. Also overall, the PPV

3 The parameter settings for the best models in KNIME were as follows:
– RF: split criterion: Gini index; number of models: 400; no limit on
the tree depth or node size.
– ANN: number of hidden layers: 2; number of neurons per layer: 5;
maximum number of iterations: 60.
– GBT: number of model: 300; learning rate: 0.3; tree depth limit: 4;
no attribute sampling.

values highlight the superiority of the 2 ensemble models over the individual models (ie, ANN and LR) in which only around half of the
positive predictions were correct.
In the only similar study we are aware of in the literature, conducted by Cami et al,21 historical drug-ADE associations along with
drugs’ taxonomical and intrinsic properties (eg, molecular weight,
atom count, and so on) from pre-2005 years were used in multiple
LR models to predict associations identified during 2005 to 2010.
Compared to their best model (Area Under Receiver Operating
Characteristic curve [AUROC] ¼ 0.869), 2 of our prediction models
(RF and GBT) provide superior results, while prediction power of
our ANN model is also comparable to theirs.
Our further investigation revealed that from the 110 true positive predictions made by the GBT model, 29 were related to post2001 marketed drugs, which, given 42 actual positive associations,
means a 69% true positive rate for these new drugs. The true positive rate for older drugs was 74.3% (ie, 81/109 actual associations).
Moreover, it turned out that out of 143 positive predictions, 102
were related to pre-2001 marketed drugs, which (given that 81 of
the true positive cases were pre-2001 marketed drugs) suggests a
PPV of 79.4% (81/102) for this group. Also, 41 positive predictions
were related to post-2001 marketed drugs, resulting in a PPV of
70.7% (ie, 29/41). These statistics seem reasonable, given the higher
number of historical publications about these drugs that makes the
model better trained for classifying their associations.
Furthermore, in terms of sensitivity, our approach outperforms
Cami et al’s, as their best-reported model had a sensitivity of 61.2%
compared to 72.8% for our model. While this difference might be
argued to be due to the narrower focus of our study (ie, including
8 ADEs), we believe it mostly has to do with the more informative
nature of the network we used to train our models as well as the
ability of ML techniques to capture complex/nonlinear relationships
compared to statistical methods such as LR. As Table 2 shows, our
LR model did not perform as well as the other 3 ML methods. Nevertheless, it is still comparable and complementary to the models

1316

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2018, Vol. 25, No. 10

Figure 2. Flowchart-like graphical depiction of the methods and procedures.

Table 2. Prediction models’ accuracy statistics
Model

Accuracy

Sensitivity

ANN
RF
GBT
LR

85.5%
92.1%
92.8%
85.7%

65.6%
64.9%
72.8%
56.3%

PPV
50.3%
77.2%
76.9%
50.9%

AUROC
0.868
0.893
0.916
0.793

provided by Cami et al. 21 Even comparing our results to those
of the studies that have employed ML techniques (mostly using
drugs’ structural variables as predictors) with a non-network
approach, 23–25 our approach outperforms theirs in terms of
most of the accuracy statistics. Table 3 indicates that, especially
in terms of sensitivity and PPV, using an ensemble ML model
along with the network approach has significantly improved
ADE predictions.

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2018, Vol. 25, No. 10

1317

Table 3. Comparison of model results with the best results reported by similar studies
Article

Network approach

Liu et al.24
Huang et al.23
Cami et al.21
Huang et al.25
Present study

No
No
Yes
No
Yes

Model

Chem.

Bio.

Other

SVM
SVM
LR
SVM
GBT

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
Yes
No
No

Acc

Sens

0.967
NR
NR
0.675
0.928

0.631
NR
0.608
0.632
0.728

PPV

AUROC

0.662
NR
NR
NR
0.769

0.952
0.760
0.869
0.771
0.916

*Chem. indicates whether chemical features of drugs are used for ADE prediction. *Bio. indicates whether biological features of drugs are used for ADE prediction. *Other indicates whether other features (eg, taxonomical, phenotypical, etc.) of drugs are used for ADE prediction.

Variables importance
Having the superior prediction model identified, we further investigated how each of the predictors contributed to the model accuracy.
To this end, we dropped predictor variables 1 at a time from our
data and ran the best prediction model. Each time, we recorded the
model’s AUROC to be compared to that of the original model.
Table 4 indicates the amount of decrease in AUROC after dropping
each predictor along with the relative importance of variables based
on normalized AUROC differences.
As shown in this table Degree_product, Degree_ratio, and
Degree_sum representing preferential attachment as well as assortativity of drug-ADE pairs turned out to have the highest contribution to the predictive power of the best (ie, GBT) model. It
suggests that our centrality-based predictors generally played a
more important role than similarity-based metrics. Of the 3 top
predictors, 2 of them (Degree_product and Degree_sum)
were also among the top 3 in the study performed by Cami
et al.21 Degree_product was also identified as a strong predictor
in the work conducted by Liben-Nowell & Kleinberg.43 Interestingly, the results show that one of the derived variables, namely,
Avg_Jacc_connected, was the fifth most important predictor with
a relative importance of around 22%. Also consistent with prior
research,21 Abs_degree_diff was the least important predictor of
network links.
Finally, by investigating our true positive predictions and considering the actual years that corresponding drug-ADE associations
were identified for the first time, we realized that, on average, our
model was able to predict ADEs 3.84 years (SD ¼ 1.97 years) before
they were mentioned in PubMed articles. Table 5 indicates a summary of associations predicted by the model for the 8 ADEs of interest along with the top associated drug predicted for each. The
“average probability” column in this table shows the average across
all the real associations, not just those that correctly predicted. The
results show that, disregarding a few exceptions, the model performance in predicting associations across the ADEs of interest was
roughly the same. This suggests generalizability of the proposed approach, as it has performed equally well with regard to various
ADEs.

Analysis of prediction errors
Even though our prediction model performed well in terms of common accuracy metrics, it is always insightful to qualitatively analyze
the cases that a model fails to accurately predict. Such an undertaking may involve both the drug-ADE pairs that were predicted to be
associated while they actually were not (ie, the false positive cases)
and the drug-ADE pairs that were actually associated whereas the
model failed to predict their association correctly (ie, the false negative cases).

Table 4. Variable importance statistics
Dropped variable

Degree_product
Degree_ratio
Degree_sum
Geometric index
Avg_Jacc_connected
Adamic/Adar index
Simpson index
Dice index
Jaccard index
Avg_dist_connected
Abs_degree_diff

New AUROC

AUROC_diff

Relative
importance

0.86
0.864
0.872
0.884
0.885
0.887
0.887
0.888
0.889
0.891
0.892

0.056
0.052
0.045
0.032
0.031
0.029
0.029
0.028
0.027
0.025
0.024

1
0.875
0.656
0.250
0.219
0.156
0.156
0.125
0.094
0.031
0

We found 41 false negative predictions made by the model. Our
further investigation revealed that 20 (ie, around half) of them are
related to the drugs approved after 2008. More specifically, we realized that 6 drugs, all approved after 2008, account for 17 (ie, 41%)
of false negative predictions. We then looked into the known associated ADEs, other than the 8 ADEs of interest, for each of those 6
drugs before 2001 (ie, when they were experimental drugs yet),
which were used to train the prediction model. We found that, compared to average (ie, 6.58), the number of known associations for
most of those 6 drugs was considerably low with only 1 having
more than 5 known ADEs. Given these findings, we believe that 1
main reason for the model making those false negative predictions
could be the relatively low number of known ADE associations (ie,
network edges) involving those drugs in the training dataset. Since
we used only network metrics as the predictor variables, such lack
of sufficient drug-ADE edges may possibly affect all of the predictor
variables related to the corresponding drugs. Of course, 1 way to address this issue is to change the cutoff point for data partitioning
(which is currently 2001), so that our training data include more of
the known MEDLINE citations involving the drugs approved more
recently. In the present study, however, changes in the cutoff year
considerably affect the size of the validation dataset,4 which could
jeopardize the validity of the prediction model.
Our predictions also involved 33 false positive cases. Again, to
further investigate the potential causes for those classification errors,
we looked into the specific drugs and ADEs involved. We realized
that around 61% (ie, 20) of these cases were related to the relatively
older drugs, approved in the early 1990s or even earlier. For such

4 For instance, we changed the cutoff year to 2003, and we ended up
with only 732 records (ie, a decrease of 303 records) in the validation
dataset.

1318

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2018, Vol. 25, No. 10

Table 5. Summary of predicted associations by ADE
ADE
Acute renal failure
Agranulocytosis
Anemia
Leukopenia
Myocardial infarction
Neutropenia
Rhabdomyolysis
Thrombocytopenia

Real associations

Predicted associations

Average time saving

Average probability

Top associated drug

32
12
9
4
27
17
40
10

26 (81%)
10 (83%)
6 (67%)
4 (100%)
18 (67%)
12 (71%)
27 (68%)
7 (70%)

3.62
5.70
2.67
3
3.72
3.83
3.92
3.50

0.7655
0.8293
0.7277
0.9436
0.7035
0.7739
0.6910
0.7517

Ceftazidime (2)*
Albendazole (6)
Ribavirin (3)
Dexamethasone (1)
Doxazosin (5)
Flucytosine (2)
Doxylamine (0)
Tamoxifen (0)

*Numbers in front of drug names in the last column indicate the number of years the model predicted their associations with the corresponding ADE earlier
than it was published in PubMed.

drugs, due to numerous biomedical studies conducted on them over
time, the number of known ADE associations and consequently
their degree centrality in the network tend to be higher than newer
drugs. This directly inflates the centrality-based predictors of drugADE pairs, namely, Degree_ratio, Degree_sum, and Degree_product. Moreover, it was shown that these were the top 3 influential
predictors of network links in our study. Table 6 compares the values of these 3 predictors, on average, for the false positive vs true
positive as well as true negative cases. Clearly, the predictor values
in false positive cases are far from those of the true negative cases
and are very close to the cases correctly predicted as positive.
Overall, our findings suggest that for older drugs, the centralitybased predictor values are overly inflated, due to the higher number
of citations involving them, for which other predictor variables cannot help the model discern those cases from actual/real positive
cases. Hence, probably incorporating some other networkindependent informative covariates suggested in the literature (eg,
molecular or chemical features of drugs) can address this issue to
some extent and help the model to better differentiate between positive and negative cases.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this study, we proposed a new approach to predict ADEs by constructing drug-ADE networks, using biomedical citations as well as
drug target proteins information, and then employing network metrics as predictors of associations in ML algorithms.
While both NA approaches and ML techniques had been
employed in the past separately, to the best of our knowledge, the
present study is the first one that employs ML along with an NA approach together in a single study. The promising results we obtained
suggest that combining these 2 powerful tools can enhance the
results we may get from each in separation. Our proposed approach
outperformed the prior studies (see Table 3), while the number of
predictor variables used in this study is relatively lower than that of
similar studies.
We believe that part of these superior results is owed to the incredible power of ensemble ML algorithms. As shown in our results,
the 2 ensemble algorithms (RF and GBT) considerably outperformed
the other 2 approaches. That is simply because of the higher power
of ensemble algorithms in capturing sophisticated patterns in the
data. While statistical and regular ML techniques train a single
model (either linear or nonlinear) to reflect the relationship between
the variables, ensemble algorithms sample the data hundreds of
times and use those samples to build hundreds of prediction models.
Then, to predict a new case, they vote from the created models to

Table 6. Comparing top predictors’ values in false positive, true
positive, and false negative predictions
Predictor
Degree_Sum
Degree_Product
Degree_Ratio

False positives

True positives

True negatives

234.82
7131.76
0.21

237.55
7615.02
0.23

203.05
3344.65
0.11

specify the final prediction. This way, instead of a single model,
which is subject to sample randomization errors, many models are
employed to yield predictions. Given the superior performance of
GBT in this study, future research may put more emphasis on
employing GBT as well as other ensemble algorithms, such as extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) and ensemble Bayesian models
for classification and prediction purposes in the pharmacovigilance
studies.
The results also suggest that assortativity and preferential attachment (ie, centrality-based metrics) are better predictors of network
edges than similarity-based metrics (eg, Jaccard coefficient). This is
in line with the results from Cami et al21 and Liben-Nowell & Kleinberg.43 Additionally, we introduced 2 derived similarity-based network metrics, namely, Avg_Jacc_connected and Avg_Distance_
connected, for predicting network edges, and it turned out that the
former is among the top 5 most important predictors. In terms of
relative importance, Table 4 shows that this derived variable has
contributed to the quality of the model around 50% more than the
Adamic/Adar index and around 100% more than the Jaccard index,
2 popular similarity-based metrics. It suggests that considering the
similarity of a drug with the drugs already associated with an ADE
provides more useful information in predicting drug-ADE
associations than considering the similarity of that drug with the
ADE itself.
Although the present study is particularly focused on 8 highly
common and risky ADEs, we argue that the high accuracy of our
predictions has nothing to do with that matter because we did not
incorporate any information about the ADEs or their relationships
in building our prediction models. All of the information used to
train our prediction models was historical drug-ADE associations as
well as drug-target proteins. Hence, we believe that replicating our
approach on a larger scale and with a higher number of ADEs would
result in the same quality results, if not better.
Another limitation of this study is that it does not account for
the strength of drug-ADE associations in the construction of the network. In network analysis, using the strengths of associations as the
linkage weights and extracting weighted metrics is a popular and informative approach provided that the weights are assigned to the

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2018, Vol. 25, No. 10

links in a meaningful way. Considering the frequency of citations
mentioning a given association as the strength of that association is
not a decent or even meaningful way for weighing the network edges
because this frequency does not necessarily reflect the strength of association and might very well be, for instance, due to the high
amount of risk involved in the corresponding ADE. Therefore, in
this study, we used an unweighted network for the analysis. Future
research could extend our approach by developing a way to score
drug-ADE associations and use weighted network metrics in building the prediction models.
While our best model performed well in terms of sensitivity, it
still made 33 false positive and 41 false negative predictions. Even
though we analyzed some potential reasons for these prediction
errors, we suspect that a portion of the false positive cases, especially
those involving recently approved drugs, might be actually real
drug-ADE associations that have not yet been studied and mentioned in biomedical citations. This also could be the case with all
the other ADE prediction studies where the models yield a considerable number of false positives. Future research may focus on such
cases resulting from ADE predictions and try to investigate them using clinical trials or by analyzing patient transactions from EHR
data using methods such as prescription sequence symmetry
analysis.51,52
Given the relatively high accuracy of predictions resulting from
employing a network approach, both in this study and the other few
similar works, we strongly encourage future researchers to utilize
the incredible power of networks for prediction purposes in pharmacovigilance. Especially, we believe that incorporating more data
sources to construct more informative training networks can lead to
even better predictions in the future. Specifically, chemical, physical,
and molecular features of drugs (eg, molecular weight, heavy atom
count, melting point, etc.) can be added to the model as covariates
to enhance its prediction power. We believe that one big methodological advantage of our study is producing quality results using a
considerably lower number of predictors than prior studies21,22,24,25
and relying mostly on the power of networks and ensemble ML
algorithms to identify patterns. Nevertheless, as discussed in the
Results section, incorporating some additional covariates can potentially improve the model while maintaining its simplicity. Databases
such as DrugBank and PubChem are freely accessible and rich sources of information about drugs that can be used for this purpose.
We used biomedical literature citations as the only resource for
the known drug-ADE associations in constructing the network.
There are, however, some other resources such as the side effect resource (SIDER) database (http://www.sideeffects.embl.de) or some
commercial databases such as Lexicomp (http://www.lexi.com) that
can be used for this purpose as well. Future research may extend our
approach by incorporating multiple resources to add as many as
possible drug-ADE links to the network, as doing so can enhance
the information extent of the network and potentially improve the
quality and accuracy of the predictions.
Similarly, with regard to the drug targets, we used only a single
source (ie, DrugBank) for this purpose. Even though it was suggested in prior research53 that the network-based organization of
DrugBank data, particularly the drug similarity network (DSN), can
potentially contribute to the prediction of side effects, and we
showed that in this study, it involves some potential limitations.
DrugBank is primarily focused on labeling targets from a pharmacokinetic point of view and possibly includes some determinants of
drug disposition labeled as drug targets. We are not sure, though,
whether the existence of such instances has improved or limited our

1319

model performance, as on one hand, they may make the DSN more
information rich, but on the other hand, the nature of drug similarities may not be the same across the network.
Finally, we believe that the chronological settings used in the present study to construct a drug-ADE network based on the chronological drug approvals and known ADE associations may be
extended by future researchers to conduct a longitudinal study by
constructing multiple drug-ADE networks at different time points
and show that evolution of this network over time enriches its informativeness and yields better predictions both in general and with regard to specific associations.

FUNDING
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

CONTRIBUTORS
Both authors have been involved in all stages of this research from
the idea creation to writing and editing the manuscript with a
roughly 70% to 30% contribution rates.
Conflict of interest statement. The authors have no competing interests to declare.

APPENDIX
This appendix describes the search strategy used for extracting data
from the National Library of Medicine’s (NLM) MEDLINE database of biomedical citations. MEDLINE is a subset of the PubMed
database and includes more than 26 million biomedical citations
starting from 1946 onward. Each article is carefully read and annotated by a group of trained indexers using a vocabulary system
called Medical Subject Headings (MeSH). The MeSH thesaurus is a
controlled vocabulary system produced by NLM to be used for
indexing, cataloging, and searching for biomedical citations and
health-related documents. After carefully reading an article, the
NLM indexing experts select the most appropriate descriptors and
subheadings (a.k.a. qualifiers) that best describe the content.
To extract required data for the present study, we downloaded
all the MEDLINE citations from PubMed (https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed) with the “AE” MeSH subheading, which is used to
indicate mentions of adverse effects, and containing at least 1 of the
8 high-risk ADEs of interest indexed as “Chemically induced.”
These 2 MeSH indices, together, specify the drug and the adverse
event mentioned as an association in a given article. For instance,
the combination of “acetaminophen/AE” and “Acute kidney failure/
chemically induced” for a given article indicates that a drug-ADE association suggesting the potential adverse effect of acetaminophen
on developing kidney failure is mentioned in that study.
The search was done multiple times, each time for one of the
ADEs of interest; however, at the end, we removed duplicated citations from our records. For each article, the following information
was collected: article PubMed ID (PMID), MeSH descriptors, subheadings, substances, and date of publication.
Since drugs’ target protein and date of approval information
were to be extracted from another resource (ie, DrugBank), we then
used the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) to map the drug
and ADE terms. UMLS is a biomedical terminology integration
system handling more than 150 terminologies, including MeSH. It

1320

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2018, Vol. 25, No. 10

integrates various alternatives of the same biomedical concepts and
assigns each concept a unique identifier (CUI) across the whole database. All the drug and ADE terms in the collected dataset were
mapped to their corresponding UMLS terms, and the CUI associated
with each was queried and added to the dataset.
The list of approved FDA drugs along with their target proteins
was downloaded from DrugBank’s (https://www.drugbank.ca)
Therapeutic Target Database (TTD) ver. 6.1.01 and mapped to
UMLS terms as well. Then the list was used to filter the articles collected from MEDLINE, so that we kept only articles including approved drugs and put away studies focusing on experimental drugs
or chemical compounds.
Finally, drug-ADE pairs were created by matching mentions of
the “AE” and “Chemically induced” tags in the same publications,
and the corresponding publication dates were assigned to the created
pairs. Repeated pairs were then identified, and redundancies were removed by maintaining only the earliest drug-ADE mention (based on
dates). Also using the DrugBank data, drug-drug pairs were created
by matching the drugs sharing at least one target protein.
The created pairs were then used as the input to both Cytoscape
v3.6.0 and the igraph package in R to create network visualization
and metrics, respectively.

REFERENCES
1. Iizuka T. Experts’ agency problems: evidence from the prescription drug
market in Japan. Rand J Econ 2007; 38 (3): 844–62.
2. Trame MN, Biliouris K, Lesko LJ, Mettetal JT. Systems pharmacology to
predict drug safety in drug development. Eur J Pharm Sci 2016; 94: 93–5.
3. Karimi S, Wang C, Metke-Jimenez A, Gaire R, Paris C. Text and data
mining techniques in adverse drug reaction detection. ACM Comput Surv
2015; 47 (4): 1.
4. Zeng Q, Kogan S, Ash N, Greenes RA, Boxwala AA. Characteristics of
consumer terminology for health information retrieval. Methods Inf Med
2002; 41 (04): 289–98.
5. Nikfarjam A, Sarker A, O’connor K, Ginn R, Gonzalez G. Pharmacovigilance from social media: mining adverse drug reaction mentions using sequence labeling with word embedding cluster features. J Am Med Inform
Assoc 2015; 22 (3): 671–81.
6. Reps JM, Aickelin U, Hubbard RB. Refining adverse drug reaction signals
by incorporating interaction variables identified using emergent pattern
mining. Comput Biol Med 2016; 69: 61–70.
7. Harpaz R, Vilar S, DuMouchel W, et al. Combing signals from spontaneous reports and electronic health records for detection of adverse drug
reactions. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2013; 20 (3): 413–9.
8. Trifir
o G, Pariente A, Coloma PM, et al. Data mining on electronic
health record databases for signal detection in pharmacovigilance:
which events to monitor? Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2009; 18 (12):
1176–84.
9. Leaman R, Wojtulewicz L, Sullivan R, Skariah A, Yang J, Gonzalez G. Towards internet-age pharmacovigilance: extracting adverse drug reactions
from user posts to health-related social networks. In: BioNLP ’10 Proceedings of the 2010 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing,
Uppsala, Sweden; July 2010: 117–25.
10. Benton A, Ungar L, Hill S, et al. Identifying potential adverse effects using
the web: a new approach to medical hypothesis generation. J Biomed Inform 2011; 44 (6): 989–96.
11. Cai R, Liu M, Hu Y, et al. Identification of adverse drug-drug interactions
through causal association rule discovery from spontaneous adverse event
reports. Artif Intell Med 2017; 76: 7–15.
12. van Puijenbroek EP, Bate A, Leufkens HGM, Lindquist M, Orre R,
Egberts ACG. A comparison of measures of disproportionality for signal
detection in spontaneous reporting systems for adverse drug reactions.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2002; 11 (1): 3–10.

13. Yang CC, Jiang L, Yang H, Tang X. Detecting signals of adverse
drug reactions from health consumer contributed content in social media.
In: Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Health Informatics, Beijing, China; 2012.
14. Friedman C. Discovering novel adverse drug events using natural language
processing and mining of the electronic health record. In: Conference on
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine in Europe, Verona, Italy; 2009: 1–5.
15. Harpaz R, Haerian K, Chase HS, Friedman C. Mining electronic health
records for adverse drug effects using regression based methods. In: Proceedings of the 1st ACM International Health Informatics Symposium,
Arlington, VA, USA; 2010: 100–7.
16. Liu X, Chen H. AZDrugMiner: an information extraction system for mining patient-reported adverse drug events in online patient forums. In: International Conference on Smart Health, Beijing, China; 2013: 134–50.
17. DuMouchel W. Bayesian data mining in large frequency tables, with an
application to the FDA spontaneous reporting system. Am Stat 1999; 53
(3): 177–90.
18. Haerian K, Varn D, Vaidya S, Ena L, Chase HS, Friedman C. Detection of
pharmacovigilance-related adverse events using electronic health records
and automated methods. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2012; 92 (2): 228–34.
19. Liu J, Zhao S, Zhang X. An ensemble method for extracting adverse drug
events from social media. Artif Intell Med 2016; 70: 62–76.
20. Hoang T, Liu J, Pratt N, et al. Detecting signals of detrimental prescribing
cascades from social media. Artif Intell Med 2016; 71: 43–56.
21. Cami A, Arnold A, Manzi S, Reis B. Predicting adverse drug events using
pharmacological network models. Sci Transl Med 2011; 3 (114): 114ra127.
22. Atias N, Sharan R. An algorithmic framework for predicting side effects
of drugs. J Comput Biol 2011; 18 (3): 207–18.
23. Huang L, Wu X, Chen JY. Predicting adverse drug reaction profiles by integrating protein interaction networks with drug structures. Proteomics
2013; 13 (2): 313–24.
24. Liu M, Wu Y, Chen Y, et al. Large-scale prediction of adverse drug reactions using chemical, biological, and phenotypic properties of drugs. J Am
Med Inform Assoc 2012; 19 (e1): e28–35.
25. Huang L-C, Wu X, Chen JY. Predicting adverse side effects of drugs.
BMC Genomics 2011; 12 (Suppl 5): S11.
26. Lazaar AL, Yang L, Boardley RL, et al. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and adverse event profile of GSK2256294, a novel soluble epoxide
hydrolase inhibitor. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2016; 81 (5): 971–9.
27. Wedemeyer R-S, Blume H. Pharmacokinetic drug interaction profiles of
proton pump inhibitors: an update. Drug Saf 2014; 37 (4): 201–11.
28. Vazzana M, Andreani T, Fangueiro J, et al. Tramadol hydrochloride:
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, adverse side effects, coadministration of drugs and new drug delivery systems. Biomed Pharmacother 2015; 70: 234–8.
29. Chiang C, Zhang P, Wang X, et al. Translational high-dimensional drug
interaction discovery and validation using health record databases and
pharmacokinetics models. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2018; 103 (2): 287–95.
30. Albrecht D, Ellis D, Canafax DM, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of tecarfarin, a novel vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulant.
Thromb Haemost 2017; 117 (04): 706–17.
31. Ball R, Botsis T. Can network analysis improve pattern recognition among
adverse events following immunization reported to VAERS. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2011; 90 (2): 271–8.
32. Botsis T, Ball R. Network analysis of possible anaphylaxis cases reported
to the US vaccine adverse event reporting system after H1N1 influenza
vaccine. Stud Health Technol Inform 2011; 169: 564–8.
33. Zhang Y, Tao C, He Y, Kanjamala P, Liu H. Network-based analysis of
vaccine-related associations reveals consistent knowledge with the vaccine
ontology. J Biomed Sem 2013; 4 (1): 33–8.
34. Kim MG, Jeong CR, Kim H, et al. Network analysis of drug-related
problems in hospitalized patients with hematologic malignancies.
Supportive Care in Cancer 2018; 26 (8): 2737–42.
35. Bender A, Scheiber J, Glick M, et al. Analysis of pharmacology data and
the prediction of adverse drug reactions and off-target effects from chemical structure. ChemMedChem 2007; 2 (6): 861–73.

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2018, Vol. 25, No. 10

36. Pouliot Y, Chiang AP, Butte AJ. Predicting adverse drug reactions using publicly
available PubChem BioAssay data. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2011; 90 (1): 90–9.
37. LaBute MX, Zhang X, Lenderman J, Bennion BJ, Wong SE, Lightstone
FC. Adverse drug reaction prediction using scores produced by large-scale
drug-protein target docking on high-performance computing machines.
PLoS One 2014; 9 (9): e106298.
38. Hammann F, Gutmann H, Vogt N, Helma C, Drewe J. Prediction of adverse drug reactions using decision tree modeling. Clin Pharmacol Ther
2010; 88 (1): 52–9.
39. Imming P, Sinning C, Meyer A. Drugs, their targets and the nature and
number of drug targets. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2006; 5 (10): 821.
40. Yildirim MA, Il Goh K, Cusick ME, Barab
asi AL, Vidal M. Drug-target
network. Nat Biotechnol 2007; 25 (10): 1119–26.
41. Avillach P, Dufour JC, Diallo G, et al. Design and validation of an automated
method to detect known adverse drug reactions in MEDLINE: a contribution
from the EU-ADR project. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2013; 20 (3): 446–52.
42. Wishart DS, Knox C, Guo AC, et al. DrugBank: a comprehensive resource
for in silico drug discovery and exploration. Nucleic Acids Res 2006; 34
(90001): D668–72.
43. Liben-Nowell D, Kleinberg J. The link-prediction problem for social networks. J Am Soc Inf Sci 2007; 58 (7): 1019–31.
44. Zhou T, Lü L, Zhang Y-C. Predicting missing links via local information.
Eur Phys J B 2009; 71 (4): 623–30.

1321

45. Jaccard P. The distribution of the flora in the alpine zone. New Phytol
1912; 11 (2): 37–50.
46. Dice LR. Measures of the amount of ecologic association between species.
Ecology 1945; 26 (3): 297–302.
47. Adamic LA, Adar E. Friends and neighbors on the web. Soc Networks
2003; 25 (3): 211–30.
48. Simpson GG. Notes on the measurement of faunal resemblance. Am J Sci
1960; 258 (2): 300–11.
49. Bass JIF, Diallo A, Nelson J, Soto JM, Myers CL, Walhout AJM. Using
networks to measure similarity between genes: association index selection.
Nat Methods 2013; 10 (12): 1169.
50. Chawla NV, Bowyer KW, Hall LO, Kegelmeyer WP. SMOTE: synthetic
minority over-sampling technique. J Artif Intell Res 2002; 16: 321–57.
51. Tsiropoulos I, Andersen M, Hallas J. Adverse events with use of antiepileptic drugs: a prescription and event symmetry analysis. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2009; 18 (6): 483–91.
52. Pratt N, Chan EW, Choi N, et al. Prescription sequence symmetry analysis: assessing risk, temporality, and consistency for adverse drug reactions
across datasets in five countries. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2015; 24
(8): 858–64.
53. Barneh F, Jafari M, Mirzaie M. Updates on drug–target network; facilitating polypharmacology and data integration by growth of DrugBank database. Brief Bioinform 2015; 17 (6): 1070–80.

