Drug Safety (2020) 43:549–559
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40264-020-00916-5

ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE

Identifying Drugs Inducing Prematurity by Mining Claims Data
with High‑Dimensional Confounder Score Strategies
Romain Demailly1,2

· Sylvie Escolano1

· Françoise Haramburu3 · Pascale Tubert‑Bitter1 · Ismaïl Ahmed1

Published online: 2 March 2020
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020

Abstract
Background Pregnant women are largely exposed to medications. However, knowledge is lacking about their effects on
pregnancy and the fetus.
Objective This study sought to evaluate the potential of high-dimensional propensity scores and high-dimensional disease
risk scores for automated signal detection in pregnant women from medico-administrative databases in the context of druginduced prematurity.
Methods We used healthcare claims and hospitalization discharges of a 1/97th representative sample of the French population. We tested the association between prematurity and drug exposure during the trimester before delivery, for all drugs
prescribed to at least five pregnancies. We compared different strategies (1) for building the two scores, including two
machine-learning methods and (2) to account for these scores in the final logistic regression models: adjustment, weighting,
and matching. We also proposed a new signal detection criterion derived from these scores: the p value relative decrease.
Evaluation was performed by assessing the relevance of the signals using a literature review and clinical expertise.
Results Screening 400 drugs from a cohort of 57,407 pregnancies, we observed that choosing between the two machinelearning methods had little impact on the generated signals. Score adjustment performed better than weighting and matching.
Using the p value relative decrease efficiently filtered out spurious signals while maintaining a number of relevant signals
similar to score adjustment. Most of the relevant signals belonged to the psychotropic class with benzodiazepines, antidepressants, and antipsychotics.
Conclusions Mining complex healthcare databases with statistical methods from the high-dimensional inference field may
improve signal detection in pregnant women.

1 Introduction
Drug exposure during pregnancy is high in developed countries, with about 82.5–95% of pregnant women exposed [1]
Pascale Tubert-Bitter and Ismaïl Ahmed are co-last authors.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this
article (https​://doi.org/10.1007/s4026​4-020-00916​-5) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
* Romain Demailly
romain.demailly@inserm.fr
1

Université Paris-Saclay, UVSQ, Université Paris-Sud,
Inserm, High-Dimensional Biostatistics for Drug Safety
and Genomics, CESP, Villejuif, France

2

Obstetric Department, Lille Catholic Hospitals, Lille
Catholic University, Lille, France

3

Centre de Pharmacovigilance, CHU de Bordeaux, Université
de Bordeaux, UMR 1219, Bordeaux, France

and a median number of prescribed drugs that may be as
high as nine prescribed drugs [2]. Apart from the recommended medications such as supplementations, pregnant
women may have pre-existing medical conditions, acute
diseases, or gestational disorders that require treatment [3].
Medication use among pregnant women raises concerns
for them and the fetus. Adverse reactions that may impact
the health of the unborn child may occur not only early in
pregnancy but also in the much longer term [4], or even in
subsequent generations [5].
While it is important to know precisely the effects of
drugs on pregnancy, pregnant women are almost always
excluded from clinical trials unless the drug is intended for
pregnancy. Animal studies on reproductive toxicity are not
always predictive of the results in humans and most medications are available without a directly established safety
profile in human pregnancy [6]. Pregnancy is a complex
condition where physiological changes may alter the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics and thus the dosing and
Vol.:(0123456789)

550

Key Points
As pregnant women are usually excluded from clinical
trials, there is a lack of knowledge about the effects of
drugs during pregnancy, yet their use is widespread.
Medico-administrative data represent a promising
resource for pharmacovigilance signal detection but call
for new methods addressing specific biases.
Refined criteria based on high-dimensional summary
scores minimized indication bias in signal detection for
prematurity by filtering out spurious associations.
effect of drugs [7]. Pharmacologic information is required
to obtain effective treatment and limit maternal and fetal
risks, whereas treatment and dosing strategies are generally
based on standard adult doses and the information available to prescribers is insufficient [8]. Overall, there is a lack
of knowledge about the effect of drugs during pregnancy.
In this context, population studies have become a crucial
resource [9] to improve knowledge, optimize treatment strategies in terms of therapeutic options, dosing, and timing,
and minimize exposure to harmful drugs during pregnancy.
Most adverse drug effects are identified after the drugs
are marketed. The main surveillance systems rely on large
national or international spontaneous reporting databases that
are mined with statistical tools on a regular basis. The goal is
to highlight suspicious adverse drug reactions by screening
all drug-adverse event pairs, the so-called signal detection.
In the last decade, significant computational and statistical
advances have opened new perspectives in this high-dimensional setting, accounting for the binary and sparse nature of
data and co-prescription mechanisms [10, 11].
Interest has grown recently in the use of other data
sources for signal detection, such as electronic health records
and medico-administrative databases, which are expected
to play an increasing role in monitoring the occurrence of
adverse drug reactions [12, 13]. As few spontaneous reporting systems include pregnancy-specific information [14],
we hypothesized that medico-administrative databases for
pregnancy pharmacovigilance would be very valuable.
Healthcare databases often contain a wealth of information on hospitalization data and/or health consumption on
part or all of the population of a region or a country. They
may also contain limited sociodemographic information
such as age, sex, and residence but lack relevant variables
such as biological data and medical history, which can constitute potential sources of unmeasured confusion resulting in biased analyses. In pharmacoepidemiology, measured confusion is classically addressed by using summary
scores. The most common method, the propensity score
(PS), aims at predicting the risk of drug exposure for each

R. Demailly et al.

individual according to baseline relevant characteristics. It
makes it possible to reduce the effect of an indication bias
of treatments, mimicking the random allocation of treatment in clinical trials [15]. In the context of rare exposures,
another score is the disease risk score (DRS), which consists of building a model predicting the baseline risk level
of the event of interest [16]. The comparative performances
of both scores depend highly on (1) the information available in the database, (2) the prevalence of exposure, and (3)
how the score is accounted for in the regression modeling
strategy [17]. To partly address unmeasured confusion, it
was recently hypothesized that, by automatically mining the
large number of variables recorded in healthcare databases,
it is possible to select a set of proxies that can correlate
with unmeasured factors. This is the rationale underpinning
high-dimensional propensity and DRSs [18]. These scores
are increasingly used for targeted pharmacoepidemiology
studies. The PS [19] and its high-dimensional extension [20]
have been used for signal detection from spontaneous reporting data [19, 20] but neither the DRS nor the PS has been
used to mine healthcare databases.
Our aim was to develop a methodology relying on highdimensional PS and high-dimensional DRS to perform signal
detection from healthcare databases to detect adverse drug
reactions occurring during pregnancy. The methodology was
built using a cohort of a representative sample of all pregnancies occurring in France during 8 consecutive years with
prematurity as the adverse event of interest and targeting all
drugs prescribed at least five times. Prematurity, defined as
a delivery before 37 weeks of amenorrhea, is one of the most
frequent complications of pregnancy and can jeopardize the
survival of the fetus. The role of maternal drug consumption
on its occurrence risk remains unknown, even for many molecules prescribed regularly. First, we assessed several strategies for building and accounting for both high-dimensional
scores (PS and DRS) in the final regression models. Next,
we derived and evaluated a new statistical criterion for signal
detection incorporating score-based model p values. Assessment was based on clinical expertise and scientific literature.
A comprehensive resource summarizing results of signal
detection and signal assessment is available in Table S1 of
the Electronic Supplementary Material (ESM).

2 Methods
2.1 Data
Data used in this study were extracted from the Permanent
Beneficiaries Sample (Echantillon Généraliste des Bénéficiaires), a 1/97th representative sample of the national health
data system (Système National des Données de Santé) covering almost the entire French population [21]. The inclusion

551

Identifying Drugs Inducing Prematurity by Mining Claims Data

period was from 01/01/2009 to 31/12/2016. It included all
pregnancies, identified by a published list of International
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems, 10th Revision and Common Classification of
Medical Acts codes [2, 22], whose duration was longer than
24 weeks of amenorrhea (French viability threshold). When
missing, gestational age was estimated according to a previously published model [2]. The Echantillon Généraliste des
Bénéficiaires contains both hospitalization discharge data,
coded according to the International Statistical Classification
of Diseases and Related Health Problems, 10th Revision,
and outpatient healthcare consumption (drugs, consultations,
transport). Socioeconomic variables available were the status of the Complementary Universal Health Care Coverage
restricted to people with low income and the social deprivation index FDep [23] used to measure the socioeconomic
environment according to the area of residence indicated in
the database. Drug use was considered over three distinct
time periods: a first period (T0) of one trimester before the
start of pregnancy to assess prenatal exposure, a period (T1)
covering the first trimester of pregnancy to assess exposure
during the embryonic period, and finally, the trimester preceding the date of delivery (TBD for trimester before delivery) to assess recent exposure. For each drug investigated
in the study, exposure was therefore coded into three binary
variables. A woman was considered exposed to a drug during a given period if at least one delivery of that drug was
recorded during that period.
Overall, our initial set of covariates contained several
types of data. First, it contained deliveries of the 400 drugs
recoded in three binary variables of exposure corresponding to each period of three trimesters, i.e., 1200 variables.
Second, it contained 16 binary condition covariates corresponding to common complications occurring during
pregnancy or serious pathologies usually considered in
pharmacoepidemiology, all of them assessed at the end of
pregnancy: conditions were coded according to the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems, 10th Revision and belonged to the following list: gestational diabetes, oligohydramnios, polyhydramnios, fetal growth restriction, macrosomia, premature
rupture of membranes, pre-eclampsia, intrahepatic cholestasis, hyperemesis gravidarum, thromboembolic diseases,
hemorrhagic diseases, pancreatitis, infections, renal colic,
kidney failure, and liver failure. Finally, we have included
three quantitative sociodemographic variables assessed at
the end of pregnancy: age, Complementary Universal Health
Care Coverage status, and FDep.

2.2 Statistical Methods
For each of the 400 candidate drugs, our general signal
detection methodology consists of: (1) estimation of the

crude model linking drug exposure to prematurity and calculation of the corresponding drug exposure p value; (2) computation of a summary score (PS and DRS); (3) estimation
of the model integrating the summary score computed in (2)
to link drug exposure to the outcome and calculation of the
corresponding drug exposure p value; and (4) computation
of the new criterion, which combines both p values derived
in (1) and (2). Steps (2) and (3) involve multiple choices that
were investigated and are detailed in Sects. 2.2.1 and 2.2.2,
respectively.
2.2.1 Propensity Score and Disease Risk Score
Development
For a given drug, PS is defined as the probability of being
exposed and DRS is the probability of premature delivery
among unexposed pregnant women. Propensity score and
DRS were built either using lasso logistic regressions [24] or
extreme gradient boosting [25]. The penalty parameter for the
lasso and the number of trees for the gradient boosting were
chosen with cross-validation by maximizing the areas under
the curve (AUCs). The extreme gradient-boosting algorithm
was initially set up with a learning rate of 0.1, and a maximum depth of 4, according to the recommendations of Chen
and Guestrin [26] and Zhang [27]. The optimal number of
trees was chosen by cross-validation in the interval of 1–200.
Disease risk score and PS were built either from the
whole set of available covariates, i.e., 1199 binary trimester
drug exposure variables, 19 binary-associated diseases, and
demographic data. We used the variable pre-selection steps
of the high-dimensional propensity score (HDPS) algorithm
[18] to select a subset of variables to which we then applied
the machine-learning method. This pre-selection step begins
with a first selection of the 500 most frequent disease codes
and drug exposures. The next step prioritizes 200 covariates with the greatest confounding potential using the Bross
formula [28], which relies on the observed associations
between covariate and outcome and covariate and exposure. Sociodemographic variables are then added to these
200 variables to form our set of preselected covariates on
which we could then estimate our scores.
2.2.2 Modeling Strategy
The crude model was written as:
( (
))
Logit Pr Y = 1|XT0 , XT1 , XTBD = 𝛽0 + 𝛽T0 XT0 + 𝛽T1 XT1 + 𝛽TBD XTBD ,

where XT0 , XT1, and XTBD denote the binary exposures in the
considered periods and Y is the prematurity indicator. Highdimensional PS were accounted for using three methods:
adjustment, 1:1 matching, or weighting using matching
weights [29]. High-dimensional DRSs were accounted for

552

R. Demailly et al.

using two methods: adjustment and 1:1 matching. Overall,
the combination of choice of score, preselection, machinelearning method, and methods of accounting resulted in 12
(2 × 2 × 3) modalities for PS and 8 (2 × 2 × 2) for DRS for
a total of 20 modalities. Figure 3 of the ESM presents an
overview of all modalities investigated.
2.2.3 Signal Detection
In addition to the crude model, we applied each of the 20
modalities to drugs prescribed in at least five pregnancies
and for which we tested the association between prematurity
and the trimester before pregnancy exposure. One-sided tests
were considered and the Benjamini–Hochberg correction for
multiple testing was applied with a threshold of 0.20.
2.2.4 The p Value Relative Decrease Criterion
We also investigated a new criterion based on the variation
of p values between score-based models and the crude
method. The rationale was that if the association strength is
enforced after accounting for potential confusion factors, then
the signal is more likely to be true. We called it the p value
p
−pm
,
relative decrease (p-RD) and defined it as: p-RD = crude
p
crude

where pcrude is the p value of the exposure during the predelivery period (TBD) in the crude model and pm is the corresponding p value for modality m ( m: 1–20). We explored
different thresholds for this new criterion in the 0–0.5 range.

2.3 Signal Assessment
The relevance of signals obtained with crude or score-based
models was assessed by a literature review via MEDLINE
and the clinical expertise of a pharmacologist. Three categories were used to classify the signals: (1) “Spurious”
for drugs with all studies showing no increase in the risk of
prematurity, or even a decrease; (2) “Suspicious” for drugs
with studies showing an increase in the risk of prematurity
in exposures, and (3) “Inconclusive” for drugs whose relationship with prematurity was not studied enough to make a
decision. All calculations were performed with the R statistical software (version 3.4.4) using the glmnet package (version 2.0-16) for lasso regression, the xgboost package (version 0.71-2) for extreme gradient boosting, and the HDPS
package (version 0.1.6) for high-dimension preselection.

3 Results
Prematurity was observed in 3980 (6.9%) of the 57,407
pregnancies. Four hundred drugs, belonging to 221 different Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical classes (fourth level),

were prescribed in at least five pregnancies and their association with prematurity was investigated. The most delivered
drugs in the trimester before delivery were ferrous sulfate
(51.2%), cholecalciferol (30.6%), and paracetamol/acetaminophen (30.4%).

3.1 Score Comparison
High-dimensional PS and DRS were estimated for each of
the 400 drugs using two machine-learning algorithms (lasso
or extreme gradient boosting) and either from all available
variables or on a preselected set of 200 variables according
to the HDPS algorithm. Distributions of AUCs were very
different between DRSs and PSs (Fig. 1). We observed a narrow range of values for DRSs (0.75–0.79) whereas the AUCs
for PSs ranged between 0.50 and 1. With regard to DRS,
extreme gradient boosting without variable pre-selection
provided the best AUCs. The results for the PS were less
clear but seemed to favor the lasso for optimizing the AUC.
The one-sided p values (corrected for multiple testing)
corresponding to the association between each drug exposure in the last trimester before delivery (TBD) and prematurity are shown in Fig. 2 for the crude model and for the 20
score-based modalities. First, Fig. 2 shows that three blocks
of modalities corresponded to the method of accounting
for the score in the regression models, except for the PS/
Boosting/Adjusting combination, which formed a separate block. The adjustment provided the closest results to
the crude model, whereas the weighting and the matching
constituted two other distinct blocks. Second, the type of
machine-learning method affected the results of adjustment
less with DRS than with PS. It had little impact on matching
and weighting results. Finally, the preselection was found to
have a very low impact as almost all pairs were in the same
terminal nodes of the dendrogram.

3.2 Signal Detection
For the sake of clarity, results for only five modalities,
representative of the 20 that we explored, are discussed in
the following, namely: DRS/Boost/Adjusting, DRS/Boost/
Matching, PS/Lasso/Adjusting, PS/Lasso/Matching, and PS/
Lasso/Weighting.
Eighty-one signals (multiple testing corrected p
value < 0.20) were generated with at least one model (either
the crude model or one of the five score-based models).
After a literature review in combination with clinical expertise, 43 (53.0%) were classified as “Spurious”, 24 (29.7%) as
“Inconclusive”, and 14 (17.3%) as “Suspicious”.
The crude analysis detected the largest number of signals (76) with most signals classified as “Spurious” (56.6%),
31.6% as “Inconclusive”, and 11.8% as “Suspicious”

553

Identifying Drugs Inducing Prematurity by Mining Claims Data
Fig. 1  Area under curve (AUC)
distributions obtained for all
400 drugs according to type of
score, disease risk score (DRS)
(a) or propensity score (PS)
(b), type of machine-learning
method, lasso regression
(Lasso) or gradient-boosted
trees (Boost), and use of highdimensional PS algorithm for
preselection (HD)

(Fig. 3). Using weighting with PS led to poor performances
with five “Spurious” signals and one “Inconclusive” signal.
Matching also led to relatively poor performances: combined
with DRS it detected two signals, one “Spurious” and one
“Inconclusive”. With PS, it detected five “Spurious” signals.
Finally, concerning the adjusted analyses, the DRS provided
more signals than the PS: 45 vs 28. Out of the 45 signals
detected with the DRS, 12 (26.7%) were “Suspicious”, 23
(51.1%) “Spurious”, and 10 (22.2%) “Inconclusive”. With
the PS, 5 (17.9%) were “Suspicious”, 19 (67.9%) “Spurious”, and 4 (14.3%) “Inconclusive”. Results of the 21 methods are shown in Fig. 1 of the ESM.
Figure 3 also shows the performances of our p-RD criterion. When derived from the DRS-adjusted models and with
a relative decrease greater than 0.20, the p-RD provided 13
signals: ten (77%) “Suspicious”, three (23%) “Inconclusive”,
and none “Spurious”. A further comparison between DRS/
PS score-based methods and our p-RD criterion according
to several detection thresholds confirmed that p-RD was significantly better in prioritizing “Suspicious” signals as well
as filtering out “Spurious” signals (Fig. 4).
Signals highlighted by the p-RD criterion based on the
DRS-adjusted model belonged to several large therapeutic
families. Psychiatric medications were highly represented,
such as benzodiazepines (bromazepam, alprazolam, and
prazepam) and Z-hypnotics (zopiclone and zolpidem).
One antipsychotic (chlorpromazine) and one antidepressant (mianserin) were also detected. Of note, the signal
highlighted by PS-adjusted, i.e., escitalopram, a selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor, is also used as an antidepressant drug. The other signals included one contraceptive, a
levonorgestrel/ethinyl estradiol association, an anti-malarial
used in rheumatologic diseases, hydroxychloroquine, an

anti-epileptic drug, lamotrigine, and mesalazine, an antiinflammatory drug.

4 Discussion
The methods developed in this study focus on reducing
confusion by indication bias that hampers the exploitation
of medico-administrative databases [30]. For this purpose,
we leveraged the wealth of data available in the Echantillon Généraliste des Bénéficiaires. The scores accounted for
many conditions that can induce preterm birth such as preeclampsia and intrahepatic cholestasis. This made it possible
to rule out treatments used in these conditions. For example,
antibiotics such as amoxicillin, cefixime, and metronidazole
were ruled out after adjustment on scores because the latter included information pertaining to infectious diseases.
In some instances, indication biases were too strong with
score-adjusted model p values remaining under the signal
detection threshold. Our p-RD was developed to address this
limitation based on the rationale that p value modification
between crude and score-adjusted models reflects the level
of confusion bias and that a decrease provides a criterion
to further screen false signals. In our study, using DRS and
a p-RD threshold of 0.20 made it possible to eliminate all
spurious signals (Fig. 4), which would be far from possible
if only a DRS-adjusted model p value were to be used, no
matter how stringent the threshold. Overall, the p-RD made
it possible to reduce the false-positive rate while preserving
signal generation capabilities.
The preselection step with the HDPS algorithm was
mainly designed to build scores from variables both marginally associated with preterm birth and the drug exposure

554

R. Demailly et al.

Fig. 2  Heatmap of one-sided
p values corrected for multiple
testing calculated for all 400
drugs and for 21 modalities.
Boost gradient-boosted trees,
DRS disease risk score, HD
variable subset preselection,
Lasso Lasso regression, PS
propensity score

under scrutiny. As expected, it had a negative impact on the
predictive performances of PS and DRS, which was more
pronounced for PS (Fig. 1). In terms of signal detection performances, preselection had a negative impact on PS and no
real impact on DRS. Nevertheless, recent work combining
HDPS and Super Learner may provide some avenues for
improvement [31, 32]. Of note, when using extreme gradient
boosting, we observed that preselection drastically reduced
the computation time five-fold, which otherwise could
be prohibitive without considerable computing resources
(Fig. 2 of the ESM).
The choice of the machine-learning method had little
influence on the DRS both in terms of score prediction

(Fig. 1) and signal detection (Fig. 2). For PS, the predictive
performances were also very similar (Fig. 1) but the impact
on signal detection was pronounced (Fig. 2). In particular,
PS built from extreme gradient boosting led to a significant
decrease in the number of detected signals. Extreme gradient boosting is a powerful predictive method but is perhaps
more prone than lasso to overfitting, especially in the case
of rare drug exposure. We used the AUC as an optimization criterion as it is often advocated to better handle imbalance in the outcome for classification tasks. Nevertheless,
as rightly underlined by one of the reviewers, one drawback
of the AUC is that it is essentially a non-parametric measure
of ranking and thus, using this optimization criterion may

Identifying Drugs Inducing Prematurity by Mining Claims Data

fail to provide correct estimates of our scores. We conducted
additional analyses to assess the sensitivity of our results to
the optimization criterion choice using cross-entropy instead
of AUC (data not shown). Our results were not sensitive to
the optimization criterion when using adjustment to account
for the DRS and PS. However, the optimization criterion had
an impact on matching and especially on weighting. For the
latter, it resulted in 171 signals, i.e., twice the number of signals highlighted with the crude model and almost half that of
the drug investigated in this study. Overall, we consider that
this high sensitivity to the optimization criterion when using
matching and weighting is an additional argument in favor of
using adjustment in our signal detection strategy. Finally, our
results confirm that PS is less efficient than DRS, especially
in the case of rare exposures, and support the use of DRS
adjustment in practice.
The suspicious signals highlighted by p-RD belonged to
four therapeutic families: psychotropic, contraceptive, antimalarial, and anti-epileptic treatments. The relationship
between psychotropic drugs and the risk of prematurity has
already been widely discussed in the literature. Several benzodiazepines were associated with an increased risk of prematurity in our study and a lack of power can be suspected
for the others. Recently, Ogawa et al. using claim databases
found an association between the use of benzodiazepines
and preterm birth [33] that had already been observed by
Hironaka et al. using hospitalization data in 2011 [34]. Escitalopram, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor used to
treat depression, was found at risk in our analysis and is a
well-documented inducer of prematurity [35–37]. We generated a signal for chlorpromazine whose therapeutic class is
known as prematurity inducer [38–40]. We also generated a
signal for mianserin, a tetracyclic antidepressant that acts as
a serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor. It has already
been found to be associated with prematurity [41], as has
mirtazapine, a chemically similar tetracyclic antidepressant
[42]. Zolpidem and zopiclone are hypnotics with an agonist action on benzodiazepine receptors. They were studied
by Juric et al. [43] who found a non-significant increase
in preterm birth in a small zolpidem user cohort matched
with unexposed subjects. This increase was confirmed by
Wang et al. in 2010 [44] using a health insurance claim database. The p-RD also detected an association between the
risk of prematurity and the combination of levonorgestrel
and ethinyl estradiol, which is one of the most prescribed
oral contraceptives. The use of a contraceptive drug in the
3 months preceding delivery suggests the late discovery of
pregnancy, or even denial. The relationship between oral
combination contraceptives and preterm birth was recently
demonstrated by Jensen et al. [45] and the risk was even
greater when the contraceptive was taken close to delivery.
Hydroxychloroquine is an antimalarial drug mainly used to
reduce inflammation in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis

555

and lupus. Balevic et al. [46] studied hydroxychloroquine
use by pregnant women with lupus and found an increase
in prematurity. Mesalamine is a first-line drug in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease increasing the preterm
birth risk for Diav-Citrin et al. [47]. Finally, lamotrigine, the
first-line antiepileptic medication during pregnancy owing
to its lower teratogenicity than other drugs such as valproate
sodium, was associated in our study with an increased risk of
preterm birth. The relationship between antiepileptic drugs
and prematurity has been widely discussed in the literature
[48–51], lamotrigine remaining the least associated with prematurity risk compared to others. Other antiepileptic drugs
such as valproate and levetiracetam showed higher preterm
birth rates than lamotrigine and positive p-RD values but
without reaching the score-based 0.20 p value model threshold (Table S1 of the ESM).
The p-RD also highlighted three signals with no reference in the literature regarding preterm birth risk. Two were
eye drops including spaglumic acid for allergic rhinitis and
the association of hydroxycortisone and anti-infectives for
conjunctivitis. The systemic absorption of eye drops is by
far lower than with oral administration but could still occur.
These two molecules have in common that they act on the
immune system by reducing its response in an infectious
or allergic inflammatory setting. The presence of these two
drugs in the signals and the absence of reassuring data in the
literature may call for caution in their use during pregnancy,
thus further research is necessary. The last drug flagged up
by p-RD in our data was lactulose in combination with liquid
paraffin, which is used for constipation, and has received little attention in the setting of pregnancy. Gharehbaghi et al.
[52] highlighted this lack of data.
There are several limitations in our work. First, this study
is limited to drugs reimbursed outside hospitals because it
is based on medico-administrative data. Nevertheless, the
consumption of over-the-counter drugs in pregnant women
is low (7.5%) in France and remains limited to well-known
molecules [53]. Second, we assumed that the drug delivery
date corresponded to the consumption date and that compliance was perfect. However, this assumption is acceptable
because compliance among French pregnant women is estimated at more than 90% [54]. Third, although our database
included more than 50,000 pregnancies, rarely prescribed
drugs could not be investigated. Fourth, there was no a priori
reference set for testing the methods, thus we built one here
that could be used in the future for the purpose of comparison. However, the study could not evaluate the sensitivity
of p-RD as we assessed only signals detected by one of the
methods.
Finally, we have proposed a signal detection framework
for pregnancy. The p-RD criterion was empirically developed and assessed in this study. The p-RD criterion demonstrated its good performance in prematurity. It now should

556

Fig. 3  Signal detection results for crude model and six selected scorebased models. p value of association fills the box and p value relative
decrease (p-RD) is represented on borders. Drug annotation according to the scientific literature and clinical expertise is represented

R. Demailly et al.

by the color of drug names: blue = “Spurious”, red = “Suspicious”,
orange = “Inconclusive”. Drugs are ranked according to their prevalence during the last trimester. Boost gradient-boosted trees, DRS disease risk score, Lasso Lasso regression, PS propensity score

Identifying Drugs Inducing Prematurity by Mining Claims Data

557

Fig. 4  Number of “Suspicious”, “Inconclusive”, and “Spurious”
signals according to score-adjusted models (a) and p value relative
decrease (p-RD) (b). Results are shown for propensity score (PS) and

disease risk score (DRS)-based analyses and several detection thresholds for p values (a) and p-RDs (b)

be tested on other adverse events and on other medicoadministrative databases. Furthermore, extensions taking
into account other exposure measures such as duration of
exposure could be investigated. Simulation studies could
also be used to optimize the detection threshold.

pregnancy from which we (2) derived a new efficient signal
detection criterion, which significantly reduced the amount
of false-positive signals. We also produced a resource set
available for further research on prematurity.
After a first wave of enthusiasm fueling expectations
that medico-administrative databases and electronic health
records could be used to perform signal detection, it now
appears that their real value lies in the surveillance of wellcharacterized and targeted adverse effects or as a complement to spontaneous reporting systems [55, 56]. In this
respect, our study demonstrates that the surveillance of serious adverse events occurring during pregnancy is a very
good example of where they can be used to good effect. It
also illustrates how innovative tools such as the p-RD, which
builds on state-of-the-art statistical methods for causal inference in high dimension, may significantly improve signal

5 Conclusions
Knowledge is sparse about the short- and long-term consequences of drugs on pregnancy and the fetus. However, signal detection has not been considered in pregnant women per
se and tools adapted to this detection are lacking. Our study
demonstrates the feasibility and relevance of large-scale signal detection in pregnant women by using medico-administrative databases. To this end, we (1) adapted state-of-the-art
tools in pharmacoepidemiology to signal detection during

558

detection from large and complex medico-administrative
databases.
Acknowledgements We thank three anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments on earlier drafts of the manuscript.
Author Contributions RD, SE, FH, PTB, and IA planned and designed
the study. RD drafted the manuscript, performed the research, and analyzed the data. All authors reviewed the manuscript and approved the
final version.
Data Availability The data underlying the findings cannot be made
freely available because of legal restrictions. Data used for the present
study come from the French National Health Insurance databases and
include a large number of variables, that, when combined, can lead to
reidentifying subjects and then collecting health information on these
persons. Therefore, the French Data Protection Authority (CNIL) forbids making such data freely available. Access to the raw data of the
French National Health Insurance must be requested from the National
System of Health Data (https​://www.snds.gouv.fr/).

Compliance with Ethical Standards
Funding This research was partially supported by the IReSP funding
partners as part of the 2017 General Call for Projects-Prevention (17PREV-49) and partially supported by the ANSM (Agence nationale de
sécurité du médicament et des produits de santé) as part of the 2014
‘young researchers’ Call for Projects (AAP-2014-033).
Conflict of interest Romain Demailly, Sylvie Escolano, Françoise Haramburu, Pascale Tubert-Bitter, and Ismaïl Ahmed have no conflicts of
interest that are directly relevant to the content of this article.

References
1. Daw JR, Hanley GE, Greyson DL, Morgan SG. Prescription drug
use during pregnancy in developed countries: a systematic review.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2011;20:895–902.
2. Demailly R, Escolano S, Quantin C, Tubert-Bitter P, Ahmed I.
Prescription drug use during pregnancy in France: a study from
the national health insurance permanent sample. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2017;26:1126–34.
3. Ayad M, Costantine MM. Epidemiology of medications use in
pregnancy. Semin Perinatol. 2015;39:508–11.
4. Veroniki AA, Rios P, Cogo E, Straus SE, Finkelstein Y, Kealey R,
et al. Comparative safety of antiepileptic drugs for neurological
development in children exposed during pregnancy and breast
feeding: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. BMJ
Open. 2017;7:e017248.
5. Fénichel P, Brucker-Davis F, Chevalier N. The history of Distilbène® (diethylstilbestrol) told to grandchildren: the transgenerational effect. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2015;76:253–9.
6. Lupattelli A, Spigset O, Twigg MJ, Zagorodnikova K, Mårdby AC,
Moretti ME, et al. Medication use in pregnancy: a cross-sectional,
multinational web-based study. BMJ Open. 2014;4:e004365.
7. Pariente G, Leibson T, Carls A, Adams-Webber T, Ito S, Koren G.
Pregnancy-associated changes in pharmacokinetics: a systematic
review. PLoS Med. 2016;13:e1002160.
8. Feghali M, Venkataramanan R, Caritis S. Pharmacokinetics of
drugs in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol. 2015;39:512–9.

R. Demailly et al.
9. Huybrechts KF, Bateman BT, Hernández-Díaz S. Use of realworld evidence from healthcare utilization data to evaluate
drug safety during pregnancy. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf.
2019;28:906–22.
10. Ahmed I, Pariente A, Tubert-Bitter P. Class-imbalanced subsampling lasso algorithm for discovering adverse drug reactions. Stat
Methods Med Res. 2018;27:785–97.
11. Caster O, Norén GN, Madigan D, Bate A. Large-scale regression-based pattern discovery: the example of screening the WHO
global drug safety database. Stat Anal Data Min ASA Data Sci J.
2010;3:197–208.
12. Liu F, Jagannatha A, Yu H. Towards drug safety surveillance and
pharmacovigilance: current progress in detecting medication and
adverse drug events from electronic health records. Drug Saf.
2019;42:95–7.
13. Harpaz R, DuMouchel W, Shah NH, Madigan D, Ryan P, Friedman C. Novel data-mining methodologies for adverse drug event
discovery and analysis. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2012;91:1010–21.
14. Kant A, de Vries L, Rolfes L. Surveillance of drug safety during
pregnancy: insight in current international activities, future intentions and need for support of national pharmacovigilance centres.
Drug Saf. 2019;42:35–43.
15. Jackson JW, Schmid I, Stuart EA. Propensity scores in pharmacoepidemiology: beyond the horizon. Curr Epidemiol Rep.
2017;4:271–80.
16. Arbogast PG, Ray WA. Use of disease risk scores in pharmacoepidemiologic studies. Stat Methods Med Res. 2009;18:67–80.
17. Arbogast PG, Ray WA. Performance of disease risk scores, propensity scores, and traditional multivariable outcome regression in the presence of multiple confounders. Am J Epidemiol.
2011;174:613–20.
18. Schneeweiss S, Rassen JA, Glynn RJ, Avorn J, Mogun H,
Brookhart MA. High-dimensional propensity score adjustment
in studies of treatment effects using health care claims data. Epidemiology. 2009;20:512–22.
19. Tatonetti NP, Ye PP, Daneshjou R, Altman RB. Data-driven
prediction of drug effects and interactions. Sci Transl Med.
2012;4:125ra31.
20. Courtois É, Pariente A, Salvo F, Volatier É, Tubert-Bitter P,
Ahmed I. Propensity score-based approaches in high dimension
for pharmacovigilance signal detection: an empirical comparison
on the French Spontaneous Reporting Database. Front Pharmacol.
2018;9:1010.
21. Tuppin P, de Roquefeuil L, Weill A, Ricordeau P, Merlière Y.
French national health insurance information system and the
permanent beneficiaries sample. Rev Epidemiol Sante Publ.
2010;58:286–90.
22. Piffaretti C, Looten V, Rey S, Fresson J, Fagot-Campagna A, Tuppin P. Management of pregnancy based on healthcare consumption of women who delivered in France in 2015: contribution of
the national health data system (SNDS). J Gynecol Obstet Hum
Reprod. 2018;47:299–307.
23. Rey G, Jougla E, Fouillet A, Hémon D. Ecological association between a deprivation index and mortality in France over
the period 1997–2001: variations with spatial scale, degree of
urbanicity, age, gender and cause of death. BMC Public Health.
2009;9:33.
24. Tibshirani R. Regression shrinkage and selection via the Lasso. J
R Stat Soc Ser B (Methodol). 1996;58:267–88.
25. Friedman J. Greedy boosting approximation: a gradient boosting
machine. Ann Stat. 2001;29:1189–232.
26. Chen T, Guestrin C. XGBoost: a scalable tree boosting system. In:
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference
on knowledge discovery and data mining-KDD ’16; San Francisco
(CA); 2016. pp 785–94.

Identifying Drugs Inducing Prematurity by Mining Claims Data
27. Zhang O. Winning data science competitions. NYC Data Science
Academy. 2015. https​://nycda​tasci​ence.com/blog/meetu​p/featu​
red-talk-1-kaggl​e-data-scien​tist-owen-zhang​/. Accessed 1 Feb
2020.
28. Bross ID. Spurious effects from an extraneous variable. J Chronic
Dis. 1966;19:637–47.
29. Li L, Greene T. A weighting analogue to pair matching in propensity score analysis. Int J Biostat. 2013;9:215–34.
30. Wood ME, Lapane KL, van Gelder MMHJ, Rai D, Nordeng HME.
Making fair comparisons in pregnancy medication safety studies:
an overview of advanced methods for confounding control. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2018;27:140–7.
31. Ju C, Combs M, Lendle SD, Franklin JM, Wyss R, Schneeweiss
S, et al. Propensity score prediction for electronic healthcare databases using super learner and high-dimensional propensity score
methods. J Appl Stat. 2019;46:2216–36.
32. Wyss R, Schneeweiss S, van der Laan M, Lendle SD, Ju C,
Franklin JM. Using super learner prediction modeling to improve
high-dimensional propensity score estimation. Epidemiology.
2018;29:96–106.
33. Ogawa Y, Takeshima N, Furukawa TA. Maternal exposure to
benzodiazepine and risk of preterm birth and low birth weight:
a case–control study using a claims database in Japan. Asia Pac
Psychiatry. 2018;10:e12309.
34. Hironaka M, Kotani T, Sumigama S, Tsuda H, Mano Y, Hayakawa
H, et al. Maternal mental disorders and pregnancy outcomes: a
clinical study in a Japanese population. J Obstet Gynaecol Res.
2011;37:1283–9.
35. Eke AC, Saccone G, Berghella V. Selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor (SSRI) use during pregnancy and risk of preterm birth:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG. 2016;123:1900–7.
36. Lattimore KA, Donn SM, Kaciroti N, Kemper AR, Neal CR,
Vazquez DM. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) use
during pregnancy and effects on the fetus and newborn: a metaanalysis. J Perinatol. 2005;25:595–604.
37. Sujan AC, Rickert ME, Öberg AS, Quinn PD, Hernández-Díaz
S, Almqvist C, et al. Associations of maternal antidepressant use
during the first trimester of pregnancy with preterm birth, small
for gestational age, autism spectrum disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in offspring. JAMA. 2017;317:1553–62.
38. Petersen I, Sammon CJ, McCrea RL, Osborn DPJ, Evans SJ,
Cowen PJ, et al. Risks associated with antipsychotic treatment in
pregnancy: comparative cohort studies based on electronic health
records. Schizophr Res. 2016;176:349–56.
39. Lin H-C, Chen I-J, Chen Y-H, Lee H-C, Wu F-J. Maternal schizophrenia and pregnancy outcome: does the use of antipsychotics
make a difference? Schizophr Res. 2010;116:55–60.
40. Habermann F, Fritzsche J, Fuhlbrück F, Wacker E, Allignol A,
Weber-Schoendorfer C, et al. Atypical antipsychotic drugs and
pregnancy outcome: a prospective, cohort study. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2013;33:453–62.
41. Lennestål R, Källén B. Delivery outcome in relation to maternal
use of some recently introduced antidepressants. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2007;27:607–13.

559
42. Djulus J, Koren G, Einarson TR, Wilton L, Shakir S, Diav-Citrin
O, et al. Exposure to mirtazapine during pregnancy: a prospective, comparative study of birth outcomes. J Clin Psychiatry.
2006;67:1280–4.
43. Juric S, Newport DJ, Ritchie JC, Galanti M, Stowe ZN. Zolpidem (Ambien) in pregnancy: placental passage and outcome. Arch
Womens Ment Health. 2009;12:441–6.
44. Wang L-H, Lin H-C, Lin C-C, Chen Y-H, Lin H-C. Increased
risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes in women receiving zolpidem
during pregnancy. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2010;88:369–74.
45. Jensen ET, Daniels JL, Stürmer T, Robinson WR, Williams CJ,
Vejrup K, et al. Hormonal contraceptive use before and after conception in relation to preterm birth and small for gestational age:
an observational cohort study. BJOG. 2015;122:1349–61.
46. Balevic SJ, Cohen-Wolkowiez M, Eudy AM, Green TP, Schanberg LE, Clowse MEB. Hydroxychloroquine levels throughout
pregnancies complicated by rheumatic disease: implications for
maternal and neonatal outcomes. J Rheumatol. 2019;46(1):57–63.
47. Diav-Citrin O, Park YH, Veerasuntharam G, Polachek H, Bologa
M, Pastuszak A, et al. The safety of mesalamine in human pregnancy: a prospective controlled cohort study. Gastroenterology.
1998;114:23–8.
48. Pariente G, Leibson T, Shulman T, Adams-Webber T, Barzilay
E, Nulman I. Pregnancy outcomes following in utero exposure to
lamotrigine: a systematic review and meta-analysis. CNS Drugs.
2017;31:439–50.
49. Borthen I. Obstetrical complications in women with epilepsy.
Seizure. 2015;28:32–4.
50. Kilic D, Pedersen H, Kjaersgaard MIS, Parner ET, Vestergaard
M, Sørensen MJ, et al. Birth outcomes after prenatal exposure
to antiepileptic drugs: a population-based study. Epilepsia.
2014;55:1714–21.
51. Hernández-Díaz S, McElrath TF, Pennell PB, Hauser WA, Yerby
M, Holmes LB, et al. Fetal growth and premature delivery in pregnant women on antiepileptic drugs. Ann Neurol. 2017;82:457–65.
52. Gharehbaghi K, Gharehbaghi DR, Wierrani F. Sliutz G [Treatment of chronic functional constipation during pregnancy and
lactation]. Z Geburtshilfe Neonatol. 2016;220:9–15.
53. Hurault-Delarue C, Lacroix I, Vidal S, Montastruc J-L, DamaseMichel C. Drugs in pregnancy: study in the EFEMERIS database
(2004 to 2008). Gynecol Obstet Fertil. 2011;39:554–8.
54. de Jonge L, de Walle HEK, de Jong-van den Berg LTW, van Langen IM, Bakker MK. Actual use of medications prescribed during
pregnancy: a cross-sectional study using data from a populationbased congenital anomaly registry. Drug Saf. 2015;3:737–47.
55. Patadia VK, Schuemie MJ, Coloma P, Herings R, van der Lei
J, Straus S, et al. Evaluating performance of electronic healthcare records and spontaneous reporting data in drug safety signal
detection. Int J Clin Pharm. 2015;37:94–104.
56. Pacurariu AC, Straus SM, Trifirò G, Schuemie MJ, Gini R, Herings R, et al. Useful interplay between spontaneous ADR reports
and electronic healthcare records in signal detection. Drug Saf.
2015;38:1201–10.

