ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE

Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6): 509-525
0114-5916/09/0006-0509/$49.95/0

ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

An Evaluation of Three Signal-Detection
Algorithms Using a Highly Inclusive
Reference Event Database
Alan M. Hochberg,1 Manfred Hauben,2,3,4,5 Ronald K. Pearson,1 Donald J. O’Hara,1
Stephanie J. Reisinger,1 David I. Goldsmith,6 A. Lawrence Gould7 and David Madigan8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

ProSanos Corporation, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, USA
Pfizer Inc., New York, New York, USA
New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA
New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA
Brunel University, West London, United Kingdom
Goldsmith Pharmacovigilance and Systems, New York, New York, USA
Merck Research Laboratories, West Point, Pennsylvania, USA
Columbia University, New York, New York, USA

Abstract

Background: Pharmacovigilance data-mining algorithms (DMAs) are known
to generate significant numbers of false-positive signals of disproportionate
reporting (SDRs), using various standards to define the terms ‘true positive’
and ‘false positive’.
Objective: To construct a highly inclusive reference event database of reported
adverse events for a limited set of drugs, and to utilize that database to evaluate three DMAs for their overall yield of scientifically supported adverse
drug effects, with an emphasis on ascertaining false-positive rates as defined
by matching to the database, and to assess the overlap among SDRs detected
by various DMAs.
Methods: A sample of 35 drugs approved by the US FDA between 2000 and
2004 was selected, including three drugs added to cover therapeutic categories
not included in the original sample. We compiled a reference event database
of adverse event information for these drugs from historical and current US
prescribing information, from peer-reviewed literature covering 1999 through
March 2006, from regulatory actions announced by the FDA and from
adverse event listings in the British National Formulary. Every adverse event
mentioned in these sources was entered into the database, even those with
minimal evidence for causality. To provide some selectivity regarding causality, each entry was assigned a level of evidence based on the source of the
information, using rules developed by the authors. Using the FDA adverse
event reporting system data for 2002 through 2005, SDRs were identified for
each drug using three DMAs: an urn-model based algorithm, the Gamma

Hochberg et al.

510

Poisson Shrinker (GPS) and proportional reporting ratio (PRR), using previously published signalling thresholds. The absolute number and fraction of
SDRs matching the reference event database at each level of evidence was
determined for each report source and the data-mining method. Overlap of
the SDR lists among the various methods and report sources was tabulated
as well.
Results: The GPS algorithm had the lowest overall yield of SDRs (763), with
the highest fraction of events matching the reference event database (89 SDRs,
11.7%), excluding events described in the prescribing information at the time
of drug approval. The urn model yielded more SDRs (1562), with a nonsignificantly lower fraction matching (175 SDRs, 11.2%). PRR detected still
more SDRs (3616), but with a lower fraction matching (296 SDRs, 8.2%). In
terms of overlap of SDRs among algorithms, PRR uniquely detected the highest
number of SDRs (2231, with 144, or 6.5%, matching), followed by the urn model
(212, with 26, or 12.3%, matching) and then GPS (0 SDRs uniquely detected).
Conclusions: The three DMAs studied offer significantly different tradeoffs
between the number of SDRs detected and the degree to which those SDRs
are supported by external evidence. Those differences may reflect choices of
detection thresholds as well as features of the algorithms themselves. For all
three algorithms, there is a substantial fraction of SDRs for which no external
supporting evidence can be found, even when a highly inclusive search for
such evidence is conducted.

Background
Since 1968, the US FDA has maintained
a computerized database of adverse event reports.[1] The database collects spontaneous reports of adverse events made directly to the FDA
or to drug manufacturers without regard to
causality assessment. In recent years, computerized data-mining algorithms (DMAs) have been
applied to look for patterns in the aggregate data
that are not readily apparent from the scrutiny of
individual case reports.[2,3] Since spontaneous
reporting databases do not contain an explicit
estimate of the exposed population, these DMAs
cannot calculate incidence or prevalence rates for
adverse events, and instead look for a disproportionate number of reports for a given adverse event in association with a particular drug,
with respect to all other adverse events reported
for that drug. A variety of statistical methods
have been used for this, differing in the way that
ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

they determine statistical significance, and in the
way that they apply corrections, either Bayesian
or frequentist, to mitigate false signals when the
numbers of reports are small and ratios therefore
imprecise. Algorithms vary in the way that the
input data are or are not stratified on various
demographic variables, and in their use of multidimensional analysis (e.g. looking for drug
interactions, or for syndromes of multiple cooccurring adverse events). Nevertheless, all the
algorithms commonly in use today are variations
on the theme of disproportionality analysis,
which accept a contingency table of drug-event
combinations as input, and produce a list of signals of disproportionate reporting (SDRs).[4]
Consensus has not yet emerged regarding the
optimal role of data mining in pharmacovigilance.[5] One factor in understanding the
capabilities and limitations of data mining is the
development of standardized lists of adverse
events, against which the lists of SDRs for a given
Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Evaluation with Inclusive Database

algorithm can be compared. Several such standards have been developed, including those
based on specific literature sources. A study by
Lindquist et al.[6] utilized Martindale’s Extra
Pharmacopoeia,[7] and the Physician’s Desk
Reference,[8] while a study by Hauben and Reich[9]
utilized a list of drug label changes. In general,
efforts to create the standards have focused on
establishing a high degree of certainty that the
drug-event relationship is a causal one. This involves a great deal of effort from individuals
with a high level of skill in interpreting pharmacovigilance data, and may be impractical in
many cases, given the residual uncertainty typical
of pharmacovigilance scenarios. Therefore,
such databases are generally not very large.
They are primarily useful for establishing the
sensitivity of data mining, i.e. for determining
whether a particular set of ‘gold standard’
drug-event combinations are detected by a given
algorithm.
While sensitivity is an important aspect of
signal detection, there is a great deal of interest in
determining the specificity of DMAs and the
positive predictive value of an SDR. DMAs appear to produce a significant number of false
positives, that is, SDRs that do not have counterparts in a gold standard database. Is there
external evidence to support these SDRs? To establish whether any external evidence supports
these false positives, it is desirable to have a highly
inclusive reference event database. This paper
describes the construction of such a database,
containing reported evidence for drug-event relationships from a variety of sources, including
pharmaceutical product labels (prescribing information), formularies, FDA announcements
and peer-reviewed publications. Thus, we attempted to broadly capture the published safety
information for a set of drugs, rather than to
create a more limited reference dataset only from
those sources that can meet rigorous criteria for
validation.
As a consequence, references in our database
vary widely in the extent to which they establish,
or attempt to establish, a causal relationship between the drug and the event that they report.
Therefore, to be able to say something about
ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

511

sensitivity as well as specificity, we established
and utilized rules for assigning each drug-event
combination to an approximate ‘level of evidence’,
to describe the strength of evidence for causality
contained in the corresponding information source.
Since much of the interest in pharmacovigilance is in the surveillance of drugs during the
first few years following their introduction, drugs
for this study were selected from a list of new
molecular entities (NMEs) initially approved by
the FDA during 2000–2004. The intent of the
study was to include typical drugs, rather than
focusing on drugs that are known a priori to have
serious safety issues. Thirty-two of the 35 drugs
were chosen objectively, and the remaining three
were chosen on the basis of their age in the marketplace and their therapeutic category, not on
the basis of their safety profiles.
Methods
Data Sources and Selection of Drugs for Study

Input data for the study was taken from the
public release known as the Freedom of Information Act version of the FDA adverse event
reporting system (AERS) database, covering the
period from the first quarter of 2001 through the
end of 2005. In the AERS database, adverse
events are described at the Medical Dictionary
for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA)[10] preferred term (PT) level, and terms at this level
were used throughout the study to describe
SDRs. Obsolete MedDRA PTs were updated to
Version 10.1.
We obtained a list of 35 drugs in a pre-specified
manner, by considering the NMEs approved in
even years (2000, 2002 and 2004), and by ordering this list alphabetically and choosing every
second drug, starting with the first drug. We then
eliminated one insulin formulation, two multiingredient drugs and one pure-isomeric form of a
previously marketed racemic compound because
of the ambiguity in determining the representation of these drugs in the AERS database.
In order to include some older drugs and to make
up for the lack of certain key therapeutic categories in our drug set, we added on an ad hoc
Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Hochberg et al.

512

Table I. List of the 35 drugs included in the study[1-3]
Adefovir pivoxil

Nitazoxanide

Amlodipine

Olmesartan medoxomil

Apomorphine HCl

Ovine hyaluronidase

Aripiprazole

Oxcarbazepine

Azacitidine

Pegaptanib sodium

Bivalrudin

Pregabalin

Cevimiline

Rivastigmine

Clofarabine

Rosiglitazone

Darifenacin HBr

Solifenacin

Docosanol

Telithromycin

Eletriptan HBr

Tinzaparin sodium

Erlotinib HCl

Treprostinil sodium

Ezetimibe

Trospium chloride

Gadobenate meglumine
a

Unoprostone isopropyl

Human secretin

Venlafaxine

Icodextrin

Voriconazole

Lanthanum carbonate

Zonisamide

Mifepristone
a

Human secretin is used in diagnostic testing. It was one of the
new molecular entities chosen for this study, but no records
appeared for it in the adverse event reporting system database in
the time period studied.

basis: amlodipine, a cardiovascular drug approved in
1996; rosiglitazone, an antidiabetic agent approved
in 2000; and venlafaxine, an antidepressant approved in 1993. Table I shows the complete list of
35 drugs for the study. The following points describe further eliminations for unavoidable technical reasons, which brought the number of drugs
actually analyzed to 27. These unavoidable eliminations took place after the data was generated,
but before data analysis were conducted. Thus
the choice to eliminate these drugs was not
influenced by the results of the study.
 The study originally included Kaletra (lopinavir/ritonavir) and Septocaine (articaine/
epinephrine). These drugs were eliminated
after the study began, because validation
revealed that the coding of the AERS data
does not unambiguously distinguish between
combination products and individual drugs
used concomitantly. Data reported here do
not include those drugs.
 Human secretin is used in diagnostic testing. It
was one of the NMEs chosen for this study,
ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

but no records appeared for it in the AERS
database in the time period studied.
 The Gamma Poisson Shrinker (GPS) algorithm requires a minimum of 100 adverse event
reports in order to include a drug in its
calculations. Rather than use different sets of
drugs for the three algorithms, we eliminated
drugs that failed to meet this criterion. The
eliminated drugs were apomorphine, azacitidine, cevimeline, hyaluronidase, nitazoxanide,
pegaptanib and unoprostone.

Construction of the Reference Event
Database

For each of the drugs in the study, we derived
reference event database entries from the following information sources: (i) the original package
insert at the time of approval and subsequent revised packaged inserts, archived at the FDA web
site; (ii) cautions and side effects information

Table II. Contents of the reference event database
Field

Contents

DrugName

Generic name of the drug for this entry

TradeName

Trade name of the drug

ApprovalDate

Date of first US FDA approval for the drug

SourceDate

Publication date of the source of information
cited

SourceType

Type of publication (label, formulary,
article, etc)

SourceTypeDetail

Type of publication detail (clinical trial report,
case report, etc)

SourceReference

Bibliographical reference for the source of
information

SourceTitle

Title of the source document

AdverseEventTerm

Verbatim term describing an adverse event

AdverseEventNotes

Verbatim text used to assign level of evidence,
e.g. ‘‘Rate for drug was 2 · that of placebo’’

EvidenceLevel

The assigned level of evidence

FromOrigLabel

(True/false) Is this entry taken from the
prescribing information for the drug at the
time of initial approval?

Reviewer

Name of individual assigning level of
evidence

ReviewDate

Date of assignment of level of evidence

Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Evaluation with Inclusive Database

from the British National Formulary;[11] (iii) announcements of label changes and regulatory
actions at the FDA website; and (iv) peerreviewed publications reporting clinical trial
reports, case series, pharmacoepidemiological
studies and individual case reports, obtained
through a MEDLINE search using the drug
generic name. If >500 references were obtained by
searching a drug name alone, then the search was
narrowed by using the keywords ‘safety’, ‘adverse’ and ‘event’. We included only peerreviewed MEDLINE publications and did not
look for adverse event information on the Internet at large (e.g. by Google searches). To avoid
‘circular reasoning’, we eliminated reports if they
utilized data mining of the FDA AERS database
as the primary evidence of a drug-event association. This restriction affected only six information sources, while 378 information sources
were used to create the reference event database.
The contents of the reference event database are
listed in table II.
We used the reference event database and additional information provided by adjudicators to
assign a category to each SDR produced by a
DMA. Table III lists the categories. Table IV
provides the rules used for assignment of a level
of evidence for each entry in the reference
event database. Note that, while the terms ‘definite’, ‘probable’ and ‘possible’ were used, these
levels of evidence do not correspond to the
Naranjo criteria or other criteria that have
appeared in the literature for assessing the
causality of adverse events, which also use this
terminology.[13-15]
Table V shows the types of information sources used to create the reference event database, and table VI shows the level of evidence
associated with each of the 6207 reference event
database entries that we created.
The blanket rules for assigning level of evidence caused the reference event database to
skew heavily toward the ‘possible’ category. This
reduced our statistical power to detect differences
among the algorithms in how well they detected
SDRs at the various levels (e.g. did one algorithm
preferentially detect ‘definites’, etc). Therefore,
we performed a second level of review to increase
ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

513

Table III. Descriptions of the various categories to which a signal of
disproportionate reporting (SDR) can be assigned. For SDR terms
that match more than one entry in the reference event database,
any entry in the I, G or D category takes priority, otherwise, the
lowest numbered category is assigned
Category

Description

I-Indication

In the opinion of the adjudicator, the SDR is clearly
related to the indication for the drug, rather than
having a causal relationship to the drug (e.g. fungal
infection for an antifungal agent) or to an indicationrelated confounder (e.g. fungal infection for an
antiretroviral drug)

G-Generic

In the opinion of the adjudicator, the term in the
SDR is generic or indecipherable in a way that
makes it impossible to determine whether or not
the term matches an item in the reference event
database (e.g. unexpected therapeutic effect,
blood test abnormal)

D-Duplicates

The SDR is due to the presence of duplicated
reports in the adverse event reporting system
database. Duplicate records were detected by
automated matching on three of four of the
following fields: sex, age, weight and event date

0-Regulatory
action

The SDR matches a reference event database
entry for a US FDA or manufacturer post-approval
regulatory actions reflected at the FDA MedWatch
website, including drug recalls, Dear Healthcare
Provider letters, black-box warnings and
enhancements to the WARNINGS,
PRECAUTIONS or similar sections of drug
labelling. This does not include simply the listing of
an adverse event term in a list or table in the
adverse events section of a label

1-Original
label

The term for the SDR matches a reference event
database entry that corresponds to a precaution,
warning or adverse event already listed in the
prescribing information for the drug at the time of its
initial FDA approval

2-Definite

The term for the SDR matches a reference event
database entry that has a level of evidence of
‘definite’, according to the criteria of table IV

3-Probable

The term for the SDR matches a reference event
database entry that has a level of evidence of
‘probable’, according to the criteria of table IV

4-Possible

The term for the SDR matches a reference event
database entry that has a level of evidence of
‘possible’, according to the criteria of table IV

5-Minimal

The term for the SDR matches a reference event
database entry that has a level of evidence of
‘minimal’ according to the criteria of table IV,
meaning that no causality-related information is
provided

6-Lacking

The term for the SDR does not match any entry in
the reference event database

Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Hochberg et al.

514

Table IV. Rules for the assignment of level of evidence for adverse event terms included in the reference event database
Criterion

Level of evidence assigned

Added to the US label after initial drug approval

Possible

Was the subject of manufacturer or regulatory action, beyond simple listing in an
adverse event table (Dear Doctor letter, black-box warning, withdrawal from market
or restrictions on prescription)?

Regulatory

Listed in a non-US National Formulary

Possible

Reported as ‘‘Incidence greater than placebo (or comparator drug)’’ in a triala

Definite

Adverse events whose characteristics are sufficiently objective and specific to serve
as proof positive gold-standard reference events on the basis of individual case
reports[12]

Definite

Mentioned in the adverse event table of a trial, but not noted as having higher
incidence for study drug than for placebo or comparator

Minimal

Stated as ‘definitely’, ‘probably’ or ‘possibly’ drug-related in a clinical trial report or
case report that utilized the Naranjo criteria or similar criteria to establish causality

Corresponding designation applied in the
reference event database

Stated as ‘probably’ or ‘likely’ drug-related in a trial article or case report without
specific reference to the Naranjo criteria or similar criteria

Probable

Stated as ‘possibly’ drug related in a trial article or case report

Possible

Stated by the author as ‘treatment emergent’ in a case report or an article describing
a trial

Possible

Subject of a peer-reviewed case report

Naranjo criteria applied[13]

Subject of a peer-reviewed case series

Naranjo score for the highest-scoring individual
case, when the Naranjo criteria are applied to
each case separately

Reported as a statistically significant association in a peer-reviewed article
describing a pharmacoepidemiological study of spontaneous reports, not relying on
the AERS database (AERS-based studies are excluded, since an AERS-derived
SDR should not be considered as supporting evidence for the same AERS-derived
SDR)

Possible

Is reported as a statistically significant association in a peer-reviewed article
describing a pharmacoepidemiological study that used chart review

Possible

a

We considered a requirement that these comparisons be corrected for multiplicity. However, we found that such corrections are rarely used
in safety analysis because their use in that context is not conservative. Only approximately 10% of the reference sources in this category
utilized multiplicity correction. We also considered whether these uncorrected findings should be downgraded from ‘definite’ to ‘probable’.
We felt that the availability of a clean, controlled experimental comparison (target drug vs control) compared with more typical observational
origins of signals justified leaving them in the ‘definite’ category.

AERS = adverse event reporting system; SDR = signal of disproportionate reporting.

the number of ‘definite and ‘probable’ drug-event
combinations. Specifically for the 268 case reports and case series contained in the database, the level of evidence for case reports and
case series was assigned individually using the
Naranjo criteria.[13] The specifics of this assignment were as follows. For the question ‘‘Are there
alternative causes other than the incriminated
drug?’’, this was scored as ‘No’ if the article rules
out alternative causes based on laboratory results
or discussion; ‘Yes’ if the article specifically discusses alternate causes; and ‘Blank’ otherwise.
This was over-ridden to ‘Yes’ on rare occasions
ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

when the adjudicator identified an obvious alternative cause not discussed in the article, or
conversely to ‘No’ if the drug-event relationship
was so well established (based on the remaining
criteria) that a discussion of alternative causes
would have been superfluous. The question, ‘‘Are
there previous conclusive reports of this reaction?’’ was scored based on whether or not the
article under consideration mentioned previous
reports. The adjudicator did not conduct an
independent literature search to proactively
identify previous reports for each article scored.
For these peer-reviewed articles, nearly all articles
Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Evaluation with Inclusive Database

515

Table V. Number of reference event database entries by level of
evidence
Level of evidence/status
0-Regulatory action
1-Original label
2-Definite

Number of reference event
database entries
66
3776
79

3-Probable

152

4-Possible

1744

5-Minimal
Total

390
6207

either cited previous reports or stated that a
search had been done. For articles that described
case series, the Naranjo score was obtained by
scoring each case individually and taking the
highest one. The adjudicator was not permitted
to combine features of several cases into a single
score. So if one case described re-challenge
and another described a dose-response relationship, these points were not added together to raise
the score as if both features were described in a
single case.
The reference event database is available
through the Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers of America by contacting the
corresponding author, subject to a simple (one
page) data use agreement.

The adjudication software presents the user
with a list of MedDRA PTs representing SDRs
for a given drug, alongside a list of reference
event database entries for the same drug. The
adjudication software is capable of aggregating
lists of PTs for a drug from several DMAs, and
presenting them to the user in a manner that
blinds the user as to which algorithm(s) detected
the PT.
The adjudicator in this study was a nonclinician researcher. In the experiment described
in Appendix A, this individual’s results were
compared with those from two drug safety physicians with a minimum of 18 years’ experience
who participated as adjudicators only in the interrater experiment and not in the main body of
this study.
The first step of adjudication was to identify
those SDRs for which comparison to the reference event database would be meaningless or
inappropriate in the context of measuring the
performance of various methodologies. These
‘flagged’ SDRs included those that relate to the
indication for the drug rather than to an adverse
event (e.g. fungal infection for an antifungal
agent), indecipherable PTs such as unexpected
therapeutic effect and those that were detected by
an automated algorithm as a result of duplicate
reporting in AERS. (De-duplication was carried

Adjudication of Data-Mining Signals

The process of matching SDRs from data
mining against items from the reference event
database is not straightforward since the reference event database contains verbatim terminology from various sources, while the SDRs
employ coded MedDRA terminology. For example, a reference event database entry might
contain the reported verbatim term ‘anemia’,
while a corresponding SDR might involve the
MedDRA PT ‘haematocrit decreased’. To carry
out the matching, we developed clinical criteria
for a match, and created adjudication software,
which allows a user to match SDRs to reference
events in a blinded fashion, so as not to favour
one DMA over another. Finally, we performed
an inter-rater study to determine the consistency
of results among adjudicators.
ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

Table VI. Contents of the reference event database by information
source type
Source type

Count of reference event
database entries

Original prescribing information at
time of drug approval

3776

British National Formulary

899

Clinical trial report

641

Case report

231

Label changes

198

Review article

68

Case series

37

Observational cohort study

31

Dear Healthcare Provider letter
Other (cohort study, meta-analysis,
chart review, etc.)
Total

21
305
6207

Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Hochberg et al.

516

out through an algorithm applied to the list of
case reports for each SDR individually. This
process is both more specific and more computationally efficient than attempting to compare
each of the approximately 1 million records of the
AERS database with every other record in the
database to ascertain duplicates).
In the second step of adjudication, the adjudicator was instructed to match SDRs (MedDRA PTs) to reference event terms when the
‘‘nature, severity, specificity, and outcome’’ of
the SDR were, in their judgement, ‘‘consistent
with the information’’ embodied in the reference
event database term. This excerpt is taken from
the FDA publication of the International Conference on Harmonisation E2C guidance, regarding identification of safety signals of interest.[16]
In many cases, the matching was trivial. For example, the PT ‘thrombocytopenia’ trivially
matched the reference event database term
‘thrombocytopenia’. In other cases, the matching
involved simple interpretation, for example,
‘thrombocytopenia’ versus ‘low platelet count’.
In other cases, more complex adjudicator judgement was required. For example, an adjudicator
might choose to match the PT ‘platelet count
decreased’ to the reference event database term
‘thrombocytopenia’, on the basis that ‘‘the nature, severity, specificity and outcome of ‘platelet
count decreased’ is consistent with the information embodied in the term ‘thrombocytopenia’.’’
Note that these instructions are not symmetric:
an adjudicator might match PT ‘platelet count
decreased’ to reference event ‘thrombocytopenia’, saying that a decrease in platelet count is
consistent with thrombocytopenia, but might not
match PT ‘thrombocytopenia’ to reference event
‘decreased platelet count’, since thrombocytopenia (i.e. an absolute drop in platelet count below a
particular threshold) cannot be inferred from
decreased platelet count. This approach was
designed to make the matching process as
consistent and objective as possible, given the
inherent variability in signal evaluation practices.
An additional rationale for this approach is that
it is liberal in matching SDRs to terms that are
already on the label for the product so that they
do not count incorrectly as having contributed
ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

new safety information. This results in a conservative estimate of the informational contribution of data mining.
Adjudicators were supposed to find all matches
for a given SDR term, so if ‘thrombocytopenia’
was matched to ‘thrombocytopenia’, they were
instructed to continue looking for additional terms,
e.g. ‘low platelet count’. However, ‘‘satisfaction
of search’’ is a well recognized phenomenon,[17]
and we did not study, for instance, whether the
same matches would have been made if the terms
had been presented in a different order than the
alphabetical order used by the software. In any
case, the blinding ensures that omissions as a
result of satisfaction of search would not bias the
results toward any particular algorithm.
To determine inter-adjudicator reproducibility, three adjudicators evaluated all SDRs for a
pilot data-mining exercise employing three
methods and five drugs. Appendix A provides a
description of the inter-rater experiment.
The database layout and methods for assigning
a category to an SDR based on the adjudication
results and the reference event database are
shown schematically in figure 1.
Data Mining

The proportional reporting ratio (PRR) algorithm as described by Evans et al.[18] and the urnmodel algorithm as described by Hochberg
et al.[19] were computed in S-Plus (Insightful Corporation, Seattle, WA, USA). The GPS algorithm,
as described by DuMouchel,[20] was implemented
in SAS/IML (SAS version 9.1; SAS Institute,
Cary, NC, USA), using a code provided by
Dr Ivan Zorych of Rutgers University. The code
was modified to calculate the score designated
by DuMouchel as EB05 (the lower 95% confidence interval limit of the Empirical Bayes
Geometric Mean [EBGM]), in addition to the
EBGM score originally calculated in the Rutgers
implementation.
The GPS algorithm requires an input matrix
of drug and event counts for all drugs and all
event terms that are involved in at least 100
cases (Nj. ‡100 or Ni. ‡100 in the terminology of
DuMouchel[20]) to calculate hyperparameters.
Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Evaluation with Inclusive Database

517

SDR from algorithm
DRUG

PT

Adjudication table
DRUG

PT

FLAG

VERBATIM TERM

DRUG

PT

FLAG

VERBATIM TERM

…

…

…

…

Reference event database
DRUG

VERBATIM TERM

LEVEL OF EVIDENCE …

DRUG

VERBATIM TERM

LEVEL OF EVIDENCE …

…

…

…

…

Fig. 1. Illustration of how the category is assigned for a signal of
disproportionate reporting (SDR). An SDR may have a flag value of
‘indication’, ‘generic’, ‘duplicate’ or blank. If the flag is not blank, the
flag is used for the categorization. If the flag is blank, the level of
evidence is used for the categorization. If there is no entry in the
adjudication table for the SDR, then the categorization of ‘6-lacking’
is assigned. When there is more than one reference event database
entry for a given drug-event combination, then a non-blank flag value
takes priority over level of evidence. If all flags are blank, then the
lowest-numbered level of evidence is assigned as the category for
the SDR. PT = preferred term.

It cannot be run using input for only a small set of
drugs, such as the 35 drugs in this study. Therefore, we ran the GPS algorithm on this full matrix
of drugs and events, as is typically done, and then
extracted the information for our 35 drugs from
the resulting output dataset. We considered removing the N ‡ 100 constraints to better match
the input to the urn model and PRR algorithms,
but found that it is necessary for the convergence
of the iterative calculation, so we enforced it, and
wish to acknowledge it. In particular, we do not
know if unpublished improvements to the algorithm in commercial software have overcome this
limitation.
GPS analyses were stratified on age, sex
and year of report source as described by
DuMouchel.[20] Categories for age were 0–17 years,
18–39 years, 40–64 years, 65–130 years and
‘missing’. Categories for sex were ‘male’, ‘female’
and ‘missing’. About 25% of ages and 7% of sexes
are missing. Analyses for the urn model and for
PRR were not stratified. In a separate study, we
found that the choice to stratify GPS and not
PRR or the urn model gave the best sensitivity
ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

and specificity for each algorithm (this study is
being prepared as a manuscript for publication).
While stratification of PRR has been used by
some, and is recommended by Woo et al.[21] in a
paper that appeared after our study was conducted, the effect of stratification on PRR is
modest in terms of the overall number of SDRs
produced, and even smaller in terms of sensitivity
and specificity.
Scoring thresholds for the reporting of a significant drug-event combination were taken directly from the references that describe each of
the DMAs, and were as follows: for GPS, a score
of EB05 >2.0, where EB05 is the lower 95% confidence interval limit of the EBGM computed by
the GPS algorithm; for the PRR method, a PRR
>2.0, an event count >2 and an associated chisquared value >4.0; for the urn model, Reporting
Ratio (RR) >1.0, an event count >2 and a statistical unexpectedness >N/0.05, where N is the total
number of MedDRA PTs present in the AERS
database for the drug in question. The decision to
limit the urn model and PRR to an event count
greater than two was made to match the conditions used in previous studies.
We chose thresholds for this study that are in
widespread use, and have appeared in previous
publications, but these are not ‘official’ thresholds sanctioned by any expert group, and we are
not suggesting that drug safety professionals
should necessarily use these same thresholds in
practice for all purposes.

Analysis of Data-Mining Results

When an SDR matched a reference event term,
it was assigned a ‘regulatory action’, ‘definite’,
‘probable’, ‘possible’ or ‘minimal’ level of evidence,
according to the information in the reference
event database. SDRs that did not match any
reference event term for their drug were designated as ‘lacking’ evidence. For each report
source dataset, the number of SDRs in each of
these categories was tallied for each data-mining
method and for each drug, using software written
in S-Plus (S-Plus Version 7.0; Insightful Corp.,
Seattle, WA, USA).
Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Hochberg et al.

518

In addition to examining the numbers of SDRs
in various categories from the various algorithms,
we wanted to study the degree to which the different algorithms yielded different sets of SDRs. To
approach this question, we calculated the overlap
among various algorithms and tallied the results.
Scoring was performed by counting matches
to individual terms, not to more broadly defined
medical concepts, nor to individual reference sources in the reference event database. There is no
standard for how finely to draw distinctions among
related terms when scoring studies such as this, and
the effects of this issue on data-mining evaluations
have been discussed in detail by Hauben et al.[22]
As an adjunct to the analyses presented here,
SDR counts in the contingency tables were fitted
to a generalized linear model (GLM) of the
Poisson family (log-linear model), using the ‘glm()’
and associated functions in S-Plus Version 7.0.
This model quantified the influence of DMA and
level of evidence categories on the proportion of
SDRs detected.
Results
Signal of Disproportionate Reporting
Counts and Categories for the
Three Algorithms

Table VII shows numbers of SDRs in the
various reference level categories for the various
Table VII. Classification of signals of disproportionate reporting
detected by the three algorithms
Category

Urn model[19]

GPS[20]

PRR[18]

I-Indication

80

52

108

G-Generic

68

36

176

3

3

5

40

24

49

486

265

790

4

3

10

3-Probable

19

3

33

4-Possible

97

56

178

D-Duplicates
0-Regulatory action
1-Original label
2-Definite

5-Minimal

15

3

26

6-Lacking

750

318

2241

1562

763

3616

175

89

296

Total
Unlabelled supported
(0 + 2 through 5)

GPS = Gamma Poisson Shrinker; PRR = proportional reporting ratio.

ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

report sources and DMAs. In total, the urn model
yielded 1562 SDRs, GPS yielded 763 SDRs and
PRR yielded 3616 SDRs. Table VIII shows the
percentage of SDRs in each category. We have
also provided totals for the numbers of ‘unlabelled supported’ SDRs. These are SDRs that
correspond to an entry in the reference event database at the ‘minimal’ level or above, but did not
appear in the original prescribing information for
the drug product at the time of its approval. In
other words, these are findings from data mining
that are ‘novel’ (with respect to the original label)
and are supported by at least minimal external
evidence. PRR produced the highest number of
unlabelled supported SDRs (296), followed by
the urn model (175), with GPS highlighting the
fewest unlabelled supported SDRs (89). Considering the fraction of total SDRs that fell in the
unlabelled supported category for each algorithm, the highest fraction was obtained for GPS
(11.7%) followed by the urn model (11.2%) and
then by PRR (8.2%).
When overlap among the various algorithms is
accounted for, a total of 322 unlabelled supported SDRs were detected using all three DMAs
combined. Table IX shows the overlap among
SDRs detected by various combinations of
methods and shows the number needed to detect
(NND) an unlabelled supported SDR for each
combination of algorithms. The NND is the reciprocal of the fraction of SDRs that are unlabelled and supported.[23] It reflects in some
sense the analyst workload required to detect an
SDR with at least ‘minimal’ support in the literature. The NND represents the total number of
SDRs that an analyst would need to review per
unlabelled supported SDR detected. SDRs that
were flagged as ‘indication-related’, ‘generic’ or
‘duplicate’, etc., were not counted in the NND
calculation, since these determinations are made
by inspection and do not require case review,
which accounts for the largest share of the
workload in reviewing an SDR.
Generalized Linear Model Results

The data in table VII were fitted to a Poissontype GLM with two terms, one for the category
Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Evaluation with Inclusive Database

519

Table VIII. Classification of signals of disproportionate reporting
(SDRs) detected by the three algorithms, as a percentage of total
SDRs detected. For the percentage of unlabelled supported, 95%
CIs are shown
Classification

Urn
model[19] (%)

GPS[20]
(%)

PRR[18]
(%)

I-Indication

5.1

6.8

3.0

G-Generic

4.4

4.7

4.9

D-Duplicates

0.2

0.4

0.1

0-Regulatory action

2.6

3.1

1.4

31.1

34.7

21.8

2-Definite

0.3

0.4

0.3

3-Probable

1.2

0.4

0.9

4-Possible

6.2

7.3

4.9

5-Minimal

1.0

0.4

0.7

1-Original label

6-Lacking

48.0

41.7

62.0

Total

100

100

100

Unlabelled
supported
(classification
0 + 2 through 5)

11.2
(9.6, 12.8)

11.7
(9.4, 13.9)

8.2
(7.3, 9.1)

Number needed to
detect

8.9

8.5

12.2

GPS = Gamma Poisson Shrinker; PRR = proportional reporting ratio.

of adverse event (‘category’), i.e. the level of
evidence, and one for the algorithm employed
(‘algorithm’). SDRs in the ‘indication’, ‘generic’
and ‘duplicates’ categories were excluded from
this analysis. The reason for testing this model
was to see if the algorithms differed strongly in
their propensity to find higher versus lower levels
of evidence. Such a tendency would have resulted
in a large residual deviance for this two-term
model. We found that the residual deviance was
only 1.3% of the total deviance, indicating that

the three algorithms produce similar mixtures of
levels of evidence.
Inter-Rater Adjudication Study

Results of the inter-rater adjudication study
are described in Appendix A.

Discussion
Data-Mining Algorithms

In this study, SDRs detected by data mining
were compared with an extensive list of drugassociated events in a reference event database.
This list was extremely inclusive of drug safety
information available at the time of its completion (March 2006). The mere fact of the occurrence of an adverse event during a trial was
enough for inclusion at the ‘minimal’ level.
Nevertheless, a large fraction of the SDRs did not
match any reference event database entry. The
fractions in the ‘lacking’ category were 48.0% for
the urn model, 41.7% for GPS and 62.0% for
PRR. If we remove SDRs that appear on the
original label from consideration, these percentages are considerably higher. These non-matching
SDRs may include spurious false-positive associations; however, they may also include legitimate drug safety signals for rare events, which
have not been recognized by other means. We
note that this is a ‘young’ cohort of drugs, that is,
they have not been on the market for a prolonged
time. Some of the reference-‘lacking’ SDRs may
be recognized in the literature as time goes on.

Table IX. Overlap of signals of disproportionate reporting (SDRs) detected by the Urn model[19], Gamma Poisson Shrinker (GPS)[20] and
proportional reporting ratio (PRR)[18], and number needed to detect an SDR matching the reference event database for each combination
Detected by
Urn model only

Unlabelled
supported SDRs

Total SDRs

26

212

GPS only

0

0

PRR only

Percentage unlabelled
supported – 95% CI width

Number needed to detect
an unlabelled/supported SDR

12.3 – 4.4

8.2

6.5 – 1.0

15.5

144

2231

Urn model and GPS

0

0

Urn model and PRR

63

622

10.1 – 2.4

9.9

3

35

8.6 – 9.3

11.7

86

728

11.8 – 2.3

8.5

GPS and PRR
All three algorithms

ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Hochberg et al.

520

Still, these numbers provide a useful perspective
on the utility of data mining.
These percentages should be placed in the
context that data mining is essentially a screening
application. This figure means that the NND, the
number of SDRs that must be examined to find
one SDR that is unlabelled and supported by
external evidence, is a relevant figure. For the
algorithms studied, this number ranges from
8 to 15.5. Of course, the actual workload would
depend on additional factors. Adjudicating
SDRs that are described on the original label can
be carried out by simply noting the SDR and
noting the label terms, and does not involve a
detailed review of cases. Assigning an SDR to the
category of ‘confounding by indication’ is often
fairly straightforward (e.g. voriconazole and
fungal infection), although doing so sometimes
presents a difficult and complex decision; for example, in the case of suicidal ideation and psychiatric medication. Also, when it comes to case
review, it should be kept in mind that reviewer
workload may be more closely related to the
number of unique reports that would have to be
reviewed, rather than to the number of SDRs
considered in the study.[23]
Therefore, our results do not provide rules for
determining whether a method that provides
more unlabelled supported SDRs but a lower
positive predictive value (e.g. the PRR) is universally better or worse than a method that
has a higher predictive value but generates fewer
unlabelled supported SDRs. Using previously
published thresholds, the three algorithms represent three distinct points along a spectrum of
sensitivity versus specificity tradeoffs, and it is
neither the goal of this study, nor do the authors
necessarily believe it is possible, to declare a
single ‘winner’. The GPS algorithm gives the
highest rate of matching against the reference
event database for drug-event associations with
at least minimal external supporting evidence.
However, this algorithm also detects the smallest number of SDRs, and did not uniquely
highlight any unlabelled supported SDRs. PRRs
identified the highest number of unlabelled
supported and unique unlabelled supported
SDRs followed by the urn model. The relative
ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

premium on specificity over sensitivity of the related multi-item GPS algorithm, compared
with PRR, has been previously noted.[24] It
should also be noted that the ability of an algorithm to detect unique supported SDRs does
not imply that it is uniquely detecting causal
drug-event relationships.
It would be interesting to ask, ‘‘What fraction
of the reference event database was detected by
data mining?’’ We avoided this because the terminology in this database is not normalized in the
way that MedDRA PTs are. ‘Fever’ and ‘pyrexia’
can both appear, and in fact can appear multiple
times for a particular drug, from different sources. Thus, the idea of counting reference event
database entries the way we count MedDRA PTs
appears not to be meaningful.
Further Limitations of the Study

We acknowledge a number of significant limitations to this study.
Many data limitations and deficiencies bedevil
analyses of AERS; the literature has discussed
these limitations at length and we will not elaborate here. In our view, DMAs can, at best, suggest
drug-event associations that can potentially be
confirmed on the basis of controlled studies,
medical evidence and fundamental pharmacological considerations.[25]
We studied detection of drug-event combinations and did not consider higher-order associations, e.g. drug interactions.
This study did not consider the time lag from
market introduction detection of an SDR for a
safety signal that subsequently became well established. This requires different methodology
and was the subject of a subsequent experimental
study, the results of which are described in a
separate publication.[26] We performed all analyses on aggregate data from 2001 to 2005, and
did not consider the appearance or disappearance
of transient SDRs that might appear above
threshold for some period of time and then fall
below threshold. We note also that this study was
done with peri-approval data, which spanned
approximately the first 5 years of a drug’s life on
the market. The conclusions from this study do
Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Evaluation with Inclusive Database

not necessarily apply to drugs that have been on
the market for many years or decades.
Although many of the reference event database
entries were the result of traditional pharmacovigilance investigations, we did not explicitly
compare data mining with traditional, qualitative
methods of pharmacovigilance, and therefore
cannot make direct statements regarding the incremental utility of data mining in general over
such methods.
There were additional limitations to the study
introduced by the implementation of the reference event database. It is possible that using
such a highly inclusive reference set may have
biased the results in favour of more sensitive and
less specific signal-detection methods, compared
with studies where more selective standards
were used. Because of the volume of data to be
included, practical considerations limited us to
blanket rules for assigning levels of evidence,
based on broad features of the articles and other
information we reviewed. Criteria involving a
more complete review of each individual study
for factors such as de-challenge/re-challenge
information, standards for case definition and
other criteria might have resulted in a higher
number of reference events classified as ‘definite’
or ‘probable’, and might have increased our
power to detect subtle differences among algorithms at those levels. The blanket rules for
‘definite’, ‘probable’ and ‘possible’ provoked considerable debate among the authors during the
consensus-building process, and it is clear that
further extensive debate among reasonable investigators would be possible. Even though the
Naranjo criteria were used in some cases, it
should be noted that none of the published
causality systems have been thoroughly validated
for routine causality assessment of adverse event
reports. However, the GLM shows that differences among algorithms in the way they treat the
various levels do not affect the overall detection
results; 98.7% of the variability in the data is explained without including such terms in the
model. Furthermore, our finding of a large proportion of SDRs that lacked a match in the reference event database would not be altered by
changing the criteria used to assign drug-event
ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

521

combinations to the ‘definite’, ‘probable’ and
‘possible’ categories.
Subjective judgement was required to identify
indication-related SDRs and SDRs due to
confounders. Indication-related SDRs and confounders are arguably two distinct phenomena.
They were grouped together in this analysis
to place them in a category of SDRs that are
statistically significant but of no practical utility
in identifying candidate drug-event combinations for further safety investigation. We note
that the ‘indication’ category of indicationrelated and confounded SDRs made up only
3–7% of total SDRs; therefore, it is not likely
that even a significant misclassification rate
with respect to this category would have affected
the overall results in a way that favoured one
algorithm over another.
The adjudicator who made decisions regarding the flagging of SDRs and the matching of
MedDRA terms against the reference event
database was a drug-safety researcher with 31 years’
experience in medical informatics, although was
not a physician, and would therefore not necessarily exercise judgement in the same way as
a clinician. With regard to this concern, we note
that (i) the results of the inter-rater experiment
showed that the differences among raters, while
statistically significant, were small compared
with the differences among algorithms or levels
of evidence; (ii) the differences between the nonclinician rater 1 and the two physicians, raters 2
and 3, were similar in magnitude to those between
raters 2 and 3; and (iii) the blinded aspect of the
adjudication make it unlikely that errors in judgement on the part of the adjudicator would serve
to favour one algorithm over another in these
results.
We relied on detection thresholds that have
been used in several published studies, but did
not conduct a sensitivity analysis to examine
the effect of varying thresholds for any of the
methods. The importance of separating intrinsic
methodology differences from threshold implementation differences and of testing multiple
metrics and thresholds in diverse pharmacovigilance scenarios, was emphasized by Chan and
Hauben[27] and Hauben.[28]
Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Hochberg et al.

522

We did not consider the degree of overlap
or relatedness among various PTs; therefore,
we cannot make statements about the numbers
of distinct medical concepts detected by the various algorithms under the various conditions
studied.
It was pointed out during review of this
manuscript that we have no proof that matching
of an SDR to a reference event database is in and
of itself a good thing, or that fraction matching
should necessarily be considered a figure of
merit for a DMA. Cases in the literature may
have been entered into the AERS database,
producing an SDR that will automatically be
supported in the reference event database. Stimulated reporting to the AERS database following the publication of a case report could
produce a similar phenomenon. A small number
of cases with weak evidence for causality could
be amplified into an SDR by these mechanisms.
Support in the literature does not necessarily
imply causality. Perhaps it is the non-matching
SDRs that provide causal, novel and important
findings.
Finally, it is difficult to make prescriptive
statements about the use of data mining and comparative performance of DMAs given the absence
of a clear decision theoretic calculus of utilities
and consequences of reducing false-positive versus false-negative findings. In general, the greater
the imbalance between too much data and constrained resources, the more important is the task
of reducing false positives, all other factors being
equal. However, an exclusive focus on reducing
false positives may prevent useful knowledge
discovery, just as an exclusive focus on reducing
false negatives may be self-defeating by flooding
the user with large amounts of information of
limited or no practical use from a public health
perspective. The question that remains is how to
determine the optimum range of sensitivity and
specificity for a given pharmacovigilance organization or scenario.
Conclusions
We were able to obtain a great deal of information about the DMAs we employed. Overall,
ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

we found that a sizeable fraction of SDRs do not
match information newly added to the original
labels or found in the literature, even in a broadly
inclusive search of those sources.
We demonstrated differences among the algorithms in the numbers of SDRs that they detect
under recommended threshold settings, and we
demonstrated differences in the degree to which
those SDRs match a reference event database of
safety information derived from sources other
than AERS data mining. These differences in
the extent of matching may be a function of
the thresholds used with the various algorithms,
rather than the algorithms themselves.
In addition, during the course of this project,
we developed methodology and software for
the creation of a reference event database and
additional software for blinded adjudication of
SDRs. We hope that these will evolve into useful resources for future studies of drug safety
data-mining methodology.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by a grant from the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA) to
ProSanos Corporation. Dr Manfred Hauben, as a representative of the funding committee of PhRMA, participated in
the design of the study, the interpretation of data and the
editing of the manuscript. Alan Hochberg, Ronald Pearson,
Donald O’Hara and Stephanie Reisinger are employees of
ProSanos and their work was funded in part by the PhRMA
grant. They were responsible for the design and conduct of
the study, data collection management and analysis, and interpretation of the data. Dr Manfred Hauben is a full-time
employee of Pfizer Inc. and owns stock in this and other
pharmaceutical companies that may market/manufacture
drugs mentioned in this article or competing drugs. David
Goldsmith, Lawrence Gould and David Madigan participated as members of a project steering committee in the design
and interpretation of the study and in the editing of the
manuscript. They did not receive funding from PhRMA except for nominal reimbursement of incidental expenses related
to the project. All authors participated in the preparation,
review and approval of the manuscript. The authors thank Dr
Lester Reich for his participation in the signal-adjudication
process, and Dr Ivan Zorych of Rutgers University for the
software implementation of the GPS algorithm. Patents are
pending on technology discussed in this paper (rights assigned
to ProSanos Corporation). The authors also thank the anonymous reviewers for many helpful comments received during
the review of this manuscript.

Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Evaluation with Inclusive Database

523

Independence model with no rater interactions:
[Frequency count] ∼ [Rater] + [Reference Level] + [Algorithm] + [Report Source]
+ [Reference Level] : [Algorithm] + [Reference Level] : [Report Source] +
[Algorithm] : [Report Source]

Deviance residuals:
Min
First quartile
−2.986
−0.572
Null deviance: 22294.13 on 485 df
Residual deviance: 403.70 on 402 df

Median

Third quartile

Max

0.000

0.224

2.407

Analysis of deviance table for Poisson model (terms added sequentially):

Term
<null>
Rater
Reference level
Algorithm
Report source
[Ref. Lev.] : [Alg.]
[Ref. Lev.] : [Source]
[Alg.] : [Source]

Deviance

Residual df

Residual
deviance

p-Value (χ2)

129.70
12 741.92
2 122.64
5 120.60
89.50
107.38
1 578.69

485
483
478
476
468
458
418
402

22 294.13
22 164.43
9 422.51
7 299.87
2 179.27
2 089.77
1 982.39
403.70

<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001

df
2
5
2
8
10
40
16

Model with rater interactions:
[Frequency count] ~ [Rater] + [Reference Level] + [Algorithm] + [Report Source]
+ [Reference Level] : [Algorithm] + [Reference Level] : [Report Source] +
[Algorithm] : [Report Source] + [Rater] : [Algorithm] + [Rater] : [Report Source]

Deviance residuals:
First quartile
Min
−2.507
−0.584
Null deviance: 22294.13 on 485 df
Residual deviance: 370.83 on 382 df

Median

Third quartile

Max

0.000

0.145

2.251

Analysis of deviance table for Poisson model (terms added sequentially):

Term

df

Deviance

Residual df

Residual
deviance

p-Value (χ2)

<null>
Rater
Reference level
Algorithm
Report source
[Ref. Lev.] : [Alg.]
[Ref. Lev.] : [Source]
[Alg.] : [Source]
[Rater] : [Algorithm]
[Rater] : [Source]

2
5
2
8
10
40
16
4
16

129.70
12 741.92
2 122.64
5 120.60
89.50
107.38
1 578.69
18.24
14.64

485
483
478
476
468
458
418
402
398
382

22 294.13
22 164.43
9 422.51
7 299.87
2 179.27
2 089.77
1 982.39
403.70
385.46
370.83

<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
0.0011
0.551 (NS)

χ2 test for significance of rater interaction terms:
Deviance: 32.88 on 20 df: p-Value (χ2) <0.0348
Appendix Fig. 1. Poisson models for the inter-rater variability experiment. df = degrees of freedom; Max = maximum; Min = minimum;
ns = not significant; v2 = chi-square.

ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Hochberg et al.

524

Appendix A
Results of Inter-Rater Adjudication Study

An experiment was performed to assess the
effect of inter-rater variability in the adjudication
process on the number of SDRs detected for
various algorithms and report sources. Datamining results for a subset of five drugs from the
main study were selected and presented to three
individuals for adjudication, as described in
the Methods section. All three individuals had
‡2 years’ experience in drug safety data mining.
Results of the adjudication and scoring process
were tabulated, and GLMs of the Poisson family
were constructed with ‘rater’ in addition to
‘algorithm’, ‘evidence level’ and ‘report source’ as
stimulus factors, where ‘report source’ is derived
from the ‘report source’ field in the AERS database. In a baseline model, ‘rater’ was included as
a non-interacting factor, which simply accounted
for the overall difference in the number of SDRs
available for scoring from the three adjudicators;
in other words, a scale factor. In the full model,
interactions between rater and other variables
(‘reference-match’, ‘category’, ‘algorithm’ and
‘report source’) were included. The results of
adjudication of reference event database entries
by the three individuals are shown in Appendix
table 1. Note that rater 3 chose not to assign any
SDRs to the categories of ‘confounding with
demographic/clinical factors’ or ‘confounding
with indication’. Results for the Poisson models
Appendix Table I. Adjudication of reference event database
terms by three raters. ‘Matching’ refers to those terms that were
matched to a signal of disproportionate reporting for at least one of
the three algorithms (urn model[19], Gamma Poisson Shrinker[20] and
proportional reporting ratio[18]) in a pilot study of five drugs
Status

Term category

Rater 1

Rater 2

Rater 3

Matching

Term is on
original US label

327

356

286

Term not on label

112

122

86

Not matching

Term is on
original US label

371

382

450

Term not on label

94

100

136

Flagged

Confounding

95

181

0

(matching not
applicable)

Generic/unable
to interpret

203

98

20

ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

are shown in Appendix figure 1. The interaction
of ‘rater’ and ‘report source’ was non-significant.
The interaction of ‘rater’ and ‘algorithm’ was
statistically significant and the origin of this interaction is not known, since the raters were blind
to algorithm. While statistically significant, this
interaction accounts for a deviance of only 18.24,
which is <0.1% of the total model deviance, and
thus is of negligible magnitude. The conclusion is
that inter-rater variability should have a negligible effect on conclusions regarding various
algorithms.

References
1. Syed RA, Marks NS, Goetsch RA. Spontaneous reporting
in the United States. In: Strom BL, Kimmel SE, editors.
Textbook of pharmacoepidemiology. West Sussex: John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2006: 91-116
2. Gould AL. Practial pharmacovigilance analysis strategies.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2003; 12: 559-74
3. Meyboom RHB, Lindquist M, Egberts ACG, et al. Signal
selection and follow-up in pharmacovigilance. Drug Saf
2002; 25 (6): 459-65
4. Hauben M, Reich L. Communication of findings in pharmacovigilance: use of the term ‘‘signal’’ and the need for precision in its use. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2005; 61 (5-6): 479-80
5. Almenoff J, Tonning JM, Gould AL, et al. Perspectives on
the use of data mining in pharmaco-vigilance. Drug Saf
2005; 28 (11): 981-1007
6. Lindquist M, Stahl M, Bate A, et al. A retrospective
evaluation of a data mining approach to aid finding new
adverse drug reaction signals in the WHO International
Database. Drug Saf 2000 Dec; 23 (6): 533-42
7. Martindale W, Reynolds JEF, editors. Martindale: the extra
pharmacopoeia. 36th ed. London: The Pharmaceutical
Press, 2009
8. Physician’s desk reference. 54th ed. Montvale (NJ): Medical
Economics Company, 1999
9. Hauben M, Reich L. Safety related drug-labelling changes:
findings from two data mining algorithms. Drug Saf 2004;
27 (10): 735-44
10. Brown EG, Wood L, Wood S. The medical dictionary for
regulatory activities (MedDRA). Drug Saf 1999 Feb;
20 (2): 109-17
11. Joint Formulary Committee. British national formulary.
52nd ed. London: British Medical Association and Royal
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, 2006
12. Hauben M, Aronson JK. Gold standards in pharmacovigilance: the use of definitive anecdotal reports of adverse
drug reactions as pure gold and high-grade ore. Drug Saf
2007; 30 (8): 645-55
13. Naranjo CA, Busto U, Sellers EM. A method for estimating
the probability of adverse drug reactions. Clin Pharmacol
Ther 1981 Aug; 30 (2): 239-45

Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

Evaluation with Inclusive Database

14. Venulet J, Ciucci A, Berneker GC. Standardized assessment of
drug-adverse reaction associations: rationale and experience.
Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol 1980 Sep; 18 (9): 381-8
15. Karch FE, Lasagna L. Toward the operational identification of adverse drug reactions. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1977
Mar; 21 (3): 247-54
16. US Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry.
E2C clinical safety data management: periodic safety update reports for marketed drugs [online]. Available from
URL: http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/1351fnl.pdf [Accessed 2007 Mar 22]
17. Ashman CJ, Yu JS, Wolfman D. Satisfaction of search in
osteoradiology. Am J Roentgenology 2000; 175: 541-4
18. Evans SJ, Waller PC, Davis S. Use of proportional reporting
ratios (PRRs) for signal generation from spontaneous
adverse drug reaction reports. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug
Saf 2001 Oct-Nov; 10 (6): 483-6
19. Hochberg AM, Reisinger SJ, Pearson RK, et al. Using data
mining to predict safety actions from FDA adverse event
reporting system data. Drug Inf J 2007; 41 (5): 633-44
20. DuMouchel W. Bayesian data mining in large frequency
tables, with an application to the FDA spontaneous reporting system (with discussion). Am Stat 1999; 53 (3): 177-90
21. Woo EJ, Ball R, Burwen DR, et al. Effects of stratification
on data mining in the us vaccine adverse event reporting
system (VAERS). Drug Saf 2008; 31 (8): 667-74

ª 2009 Adis Data Information BV. All rights reserved.

525

22. Hauben M, Patadia VK, Goldsmith D. What counts in data
mining? Drug Saf 2006; 29: 827-32
23. Hauben M, Vogel U, Maignen F. Number needed to detect:
nuances in the use of a simple and intuitive signal detection
metric. Pharm Med 2008; 13: 1178-2595
24. Hauben M, Madigan D, Gerrits CM, et al. The role of data
mining in pharmacovigilance. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2005;
4 (5): 929-48
25. Aronson JK, Hauben M. Anecdotes as evidence. BMJ 2003;
326: 1346
26. Hochberg AM, Hauben M. Time-to-signal comparison
for drug safety data mining algorithms versus traditional
signaling criteria. Clin Pharmacol Ther. Epub 2009
Mar 25
27. Chan KA, Hauben M. Signal detection in pharmacovigilance: empirical evaluation of data mining tools. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2005 Sep; 14 (9): 597-9
28. Hauben M. Trimethoprim-induced hyperkalaemia: lessons
in data mining. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004 Sep; 58 (3):
338-9

Correspondence: Mr Alan Hochberg, ProSanos Corporation,
225 Market St, Suite 502, Harrisburg, PA 17102, USA.
E-mail: alan.hochberg@prosanos.com

Drug Safety 2009; 32 (6)

