Thrombotic Events Associated with C1 Esterase Inhibitor
Products in Patients with Hereditary Angioedema:
Investigation from the United States Food and Drug
Administration Adverse Event Reporting System Database
Pranav K. Gandhi, Ph.D., William M. Gentry, Pharm.D., and
Michael B. Bottorff, Pharm.D., FCCP, C.L.S.
Study Objective. To investigate reports of thrombotic events associated with
the use of C1 esterase inhibitor products in patients with hereditary angioedema in the United States.
Design. Retrospective data mining analysis.
Source. The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) adverse
event reporting system (AERS) database.
Measurements and Main Results. Case reports of C1 esterase inhibitor products, thrombotic events, and C1 esterase inhibitor product–associated
thrombotic events (i.e., combination cases) were extracted from the AERS
database, using the time frames of each respective product’s FDA approval
date through the second quarter of 2011. Bayesian statistical methodology
within the neural network architecture was implemented to identify
potential signals of a drug-associated adverse event. A potential signal is
generated when the lower limit of the 95% 2-sided confidence interval of
the information component, denoted by IC025, is greater than zero. This
suggests that the particular drug-associated adverse event was reported to
the database more often than statistically expected from reports available
in the database. Ten combination cases of thrombotic events associated
with the use of one C1 esterase inhibitor product (Cinryze) were identified in patients with hereditary angioedema. A potential signal demonstrated by an IC025 value greater than zero (IC025 = 2.91) was generated
for these combination cases.
Conclusion. The extracted cases from the AERS indicate continuing reports of
thrombotic events associated with the use of one C1 esterase inhibitor product among patients with hereditary angioedema. The AERS is incapable of
establishing a causal link and detecting the true frequency of an adverse event
associated with a drug; however, potential signals of C1 esterase inhibitor
product–associated thrombotic events among patients with hereditary angioedema were identified in the extracted combination cases.
Key Words: C1 esterase inhibitor, hereditary angioedema, HAE, thrombotic
events, Food and Drug Administration, adverse event reporting system
database.
(Pharmacotherapy 2012;32(10):902–909)

C1 ESTERASE INHIBITOR PRODUCT–ASSOCIATED THROMBOTIC EVENTS Gandhi et al
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare autosomal dominant disease caused by deficiency of
functional C1 esterase inhibitor, which occurs in
approximately 1 in 50,000 people worldwide.1
C1 esterase inhibitor is one of the serine proteinase inhibitors that regulate complement activation and the fibrinolytic system.2, 3 Hereditary
angioedema is characterized by recurring episodic attacks of nonpruritic edema of subcutaneous and submucosal tissue affecting the
abdomen, legs, arms, hands, feet, genitalia, face,
and/or larynx, which can be life-threatening.4, 5
There are three types of HAE; 85% of patients
are classified as type I, which is characterized by
low levels of C1 esterase inhibitor. Most of the
remaining patients have type II, characterized by
normal or elevated levels of C1 esterase inhibitor
that is nonfunctional. Type III occurs mainly in
women due to mutations in the gene for coagulation factor XII.6–8 Symptoms of HAE usually
manifest before puberty. Most patients have their
first attack by 20 years of age. The number of
attacks varies among patients, with the frequency ranging from less than one episode/
month to more than five episodes/month.9, 10
Clinical presentation of HAE is swelling that
may begin in any area of the body and spreads,
most commonly, to the extremities, abdomen, or
laryngeal areas. These swelling attacks, if left
untreated, typically last 24–96 hours.9 Abdominal attacks can cause severe pain, nausea, and
vomiting. On physical examination, bowel
sounds may be silent along with guarding and
rebound tenderness, which has led to unnecessary abdominal surgeries.1 Laryngeal attacks,
which occur less frequently, are the most serious
due to the possibility of asphyxiation; however,
more than half of patients have had at least one
laryngeal attack in their lifetime.9 Laryngeal
attacks may require respiratory care and ventilator support, which are treated in emergency
departments and/or intensive care units.11 Historical data suggest that over 30% of deaths
among patients with HAE are attributed to
asphyxiation from laryngeal attacks.1

From the Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of
Pharmacy, South College, Knoxville, Tennessee
(all
authors).
For
reprints,
visit
https://caesar.sheridan.com/
reprints/redir.php?pub=10089&acro=PHAR. For questions
or comments, contact Pranav K. Gandhi, Ph.D., Department of Pharmacy Practice, South College School of Pharmacy, 400 Goodys Lane, Knoxville, TN 37919; e-mail:
pgandhi@southcollegetn.edu.

903

Management of HAE includes treatment of
acute attacks; short-term prophylaxis to prevent
attacks before or during known triggers such as
dental procedures, surgery, and infection; and
long-term prophylaxis to prevent frequent recurrent attacks.11 Before 2008, no therapies had
been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) specifically for the
treatment of HAE. Treatment was limited to use
of fresh frozen plasma, 17a-alkylated androgens,
antifibrinolytics, and supportive care.1 Fresh frozen plasma is still used as it contains C1 esterase
inhibitor, but the potential for blood-borne
pathogens and worsening of the attack due to
protein kinin substrates found in the plasma
limit its use.11 Patients with frequent attacks are
treated prophylactically with 17a-alkylated
androgens (e.g., danazol) or antifibrinolytics
(e.g., e-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid).
Although these drug classes have not been compared directly for the prophylaxis of HAE
attacks, the 17a-alkylated androgens are more
effective.1 Due to the wide range of adverse
effects associated with androgen therapy such as
weight gain, menstrual irregularities, hypertension, dyslipidemia, liver neoplasms, and cholestasis, its use should begin after puberty, and
monitoring of liver function tests, lipid profile,
and compete blood count should be performed
every 6 months.1, 5 Androgens should be administered at the lowest effective dose.11 Antifibrinolytics, compared with androgens, are preferred
in children and pregnant women. Adverse effects
of antifibrinolytics include dyspepsia, hypotension, myalgia, rhabdomyolysis, retinal changes,
and possible increased risk of thrombi.5 Use of
tranexamic acid requires monitoring of creatine
kinase, liver function, renal function, urinalysis,
and ophthalmology examinations for glaucoma.5
Since October 2008, four products have been
approved by the FDA for the treatment or prophylaxis of HAE. Cinryze (C1 esterase inhibitor
[human]; ViroPharma Inc., New York, NY) was
approved in October 2008, and Berinert (C1
esterase inhibitor [human]; CSL Behring, Marburg, Germany) was approved in October
2009.12, 13 Both Cinryze and Berinert are administered by intravenous infusion and are individually
approved for the routine prophylaxis of HAE
attacks and treatment of acute abdominal or facial
attacks of HAE in adults and adolescents, respectively. Kalbitor (ecallantide; Dyax Corp.,
Cambridge, MA), approved in December 2009, is
a kallikrein inhibitor, and Firazyr (icatibant;
Shire; Wayne, PA), approved in August 2011, is a

904

PHARMACOTHERAPY Volume 32, Number 10, 2012

bradykinin B2 antagonist; both drugs are administered by subcutaneous injection and are approved
for the treatment of acute attacks of HAE.14–16
The C1 esterase inhibitor products provide a possible treatment option compared with the less
effective fresh frozen plasma, 17a-alkylated
androgens, and antifibrinolytics for patients with
HAE.17 The literature consistently shows that C1
esterase inhibitor products are safe and efficacious
treatment options for patients with HAE.12–17
The package inserts for the two C1 esterase
inhibitor products report the occurrence of thrombotic events when the drug is used off-label at high
doses.12, 13 The recommended dose for Cinryze is
1000 units intravenously every 3–4 days, whereas
the recommended dose for Berinert is 20 units/kg
body weight.12, 13 Overdosage is reported to be at
doses 14 times the recommended dose (thrombogenic threshold at doses > 200 units/kg in animal
studies) and doses greater than 20 units/kg body
weight for Cinryze and Berinert, respectively.12, 13
According to the package insert, an open-label trial
investigating the use of Cinryze reported five serious thrombotic events (myocardial infarction, deep
vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, and two
cerebrovascular accidents) in patients with HAE
who had underlying risk factors for thrombotic
events.12 In addition, the FDA has highlighted serious risks of Cinryze- and Berinert-associated
thrombotic events in patients with HAE.18
To our knowledge, no postmarketing data
analysis has examined the reports of thrombotic
events associated with use of C1 esterase inhibitor products over a period of time. Thus, the
primary objective of this study was to identify
potential reports of thrombotic events associated
with the C1 esterase inhibitor products reported
in the FDA’s Adverse Event Reporting System
(AERS) database. The secondary objective was
to investigate any potential reports of thrombotic
events associated with Kalbitor using the AERS
database. At the time this study was conducted,
the third quarter data of 2011 were not available; thus, thrombotic events associated with
Firazyr (approved in August 2011) were not
investigated.

Adverse Event Data Set
The AERS is a spontaneous reporting database
that consists of adverse event reports of
approved drugs and therapeutic biologic products, with mandatory reporting guidelines for
the pharmaceutical companies and voluntarily
reports submitted by health care professionals
and consumers.19 The information from AERS is
available in quarterly files, with data available
from seven files: demographic, drug, outcome,
indication, reaction, therapy, and report.20 For
our study, data were linked across these seven
files. The information available across these
seven files includes adverse events, demographic
and administrative information, and the initial
report image identification number (if available);
drug information from the case reports; reaction
information; patient outcome information; drug
therapy start and end dates; adverse events
coded and reviewed in accordance with the
Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities
(MedDRA) preferred terms; indications for use
(diagnoses) for the reported drugs; and information on the source of the reports.
The initial process involved linking these
seven data files based on matching the primary
key individual safety report, applicable for each
report provided to the FDA available in all seven
files, and the secondary key drug sequence number, available from the drug, therapy, and indication files. The individual case reports for this
analysis consisted of an extract of the AERS
database with duplicate reports and drug redundancies removed to eliminate repetition and
enhance accuracy. Initial and follow-up reports
with similar primary linked identification numbers were taken as a unique patient case report.
In the event that multiple reports about the
same adverse event were identified in the AERS
system by a common case number, the safety
report with the most recent date was used.
Reports of events occurring in foreign countries
were excluded to focus the analysis on events in
the United States; this exclusion also helped
minimize the variation caused by different FDA
requirements for foreign reporting and different
national systems for postmarketing surveillance.

Methods
In this retrospective data mining analysis, we
assessed case reports extracted from the FDA’s
AERS database. We implemented Bayesian statistics
within the neural network architecture to quantitatively assess whether thrombotic events were associated with C1 esterase inhibitor products.

Adverse Event and Drug Terms
For this study, thrombotic event reports were
classified into two categories: confirmed and possible. The classification of reports into confirmed
or possible cases was done to better equip the

C1 ESTERASE INHIBITOR PRODUCT–ASSOCIATED THROMBOTIC EVENTS Gandhi et al
patients and health care professionals to study the
disease condition and highlight the complexity in
identifying possible adverse events associated
with the drug. Individual case reports were identified as confirmed cases when their reported
adverse events were comparable to the selected
MedDRA preferred terms available from the AERS
database (Table 1). The individual preferred
terms were combined into a single term representing a thrombotic event. On the other hand,
individuals were identified as possible cases when
their reported adverse events were compatible
with reports of thrombotic events but were not
identified as one of the MedDRA preferred terms.
The selection of possible cases using C1 esterase
inhibitor products was conducted after analyzing
each patient’s complete list of adverse events
reported in the AERS database. All possible cases
were selected for the study analyses by consensus
of all study authors.
The AERS database allows reports of arbitrary
drug names, including trade names and abbreviations. We carefully searched the AERS database
to identify all relevant drug designations and
combined them to determine the number of
unique patient cases reported using C1 esterase
inhibitor products. Adverse event reports listing
Cinryze, Berinert, Kalbitor, DX-88 (investigational designation for ecallantide), ecallantide,
and C1 esterase inhibitor as the suspect drug
were extracted from the AERS database.
Table 1. Thrombotic-Related Preferred Terms from the
United States Food and Drug Administration Adverse
Event Reporting System
Preferred Terms
Deep vein thrombosis
Pulmonary embolism
Renal vein thrombosis
Renal artery thrombosis
Stroke
Jugular vein thrombosis
Transient ischemic attack
Venous thrombosis
Thromboembolism
Arterial thrombosis
Inflammatory or infiltrative cardiomyopathy
Peripheral embolism
Peripheral arterial embolism
Unstable angina
Coronary thrombosis
Fatal myocardial infarction
Nonfatal myocardial infarction
Myocardial infarction
Embolic stroke
Intracardiac thrombus

905

Bayesian Confidence Propagation Neural
Network Methodology
Pharmacovigilance methods such as data mining algorithms have been applied to identify
potential signals of safety problems for drugassociated adverse events reported to the AERS
database.21, 22 These algorithms highlight potential signals of specific drug–adverse event combination cases that are reported more frequently
than expected in the database. The Bayesian
confidence
propagation
neural
network
(BCPNN) was used to conduct the data mining
analysis in the AERS database.22–24
With BCPNN methodology, the association
between the drug and adverse event is estimated using a measure of disproportionality
called the information component (IC).22–24
The estimation of the IC value is dependent
on parameters such as the number of unique
drug reports, the specific adverse event, the
listing of specific drug–adverse event combination case reports, and the total number of
reports in the database. A Dirichlet prior distribution is used for the various parameters to
enable closed-form expressions for the posterior distributions and associated posterior intervals.22–24 A potential signal is generated when
the lower limit of the 95% 2-sided confidence
interval of the IC, denoted by IC025, exceeds
zero.22–24 The signals were identified as potential since the combination cases need further
case-by-case clinical investigation.
The higher the IC value (i.e., positive IC values), the greater likelihood that the combination of the drug–adverse event is reported more
frequently in the database than statistically
expected from reports available in the database.24, 25 On the other hand, negative IC values indicate that the combination cases of the
drug-associated adverse event are reported less
than statistically expected in the database.24, 25
A retrospective data mining analysis using
BCPNN was applied to the AERS database for
each respective drug, using its FDA approval date
in the United States as the start date for the search
(Berinert, October 9, 2009; Cinryze, October 10,
2008; Kalbitor, December 1, 2009) through the
second quarter of 2011.12–14 Calculations using
BCPNN were performed using drug–adverse
event combination categories for the C1 esterase
inhibitor product–thrombotic event reports for
confirmed cases.

906

PHARMACOTHERAPY Volume 32, Number 10, 2012

Results
After linking the seven data files in AERS, a
total of 841,126 unduplicated U.S. case reports
were identified from the fourth quarter of 2008
through the second quarter of 2011. From these
reports, 71 noted use of C1 esterase inhibitor
products. Sixty-eight of these reports involved
patients receiving Cinryze, and three involved
patients receiving Berinert; no case reports were
identified concerning patients using Kalbitor. All
of the 71 unique case reports addressed patients
with HAE using C1 esterase inhibitor products.
A total of 2458 unduplicated U.S. reports concerning thrombotic events were extracted from
the AERS database. The combination case
reports of C1 esterase inhibitor products and
thrombotic events extracted from the database
corresponded to 10 confirmed cases of a C1
esterase inhibitor product–associated thrombotic
event (Table 2). Cinryze was reported as the primary suspect drug in all 10 reports. Other
adverse events reported in patients with HAE
who were receiving C1 esterase inhibitor prod-

ucts were fatigue (eight patients), peripheral
edema (seven), infusion-related reaction (six),
abdominal pain (five), device-related infection
(four), back pain (four), vomiting (four), and
unspecified pain (four), among others. A
detailed list of other adverse events that
occurred in fewer than three patients is available
on request.
The AERS data also revealed Cinryze-associated thrombotic events were most likely to occur
in individuals aged 10–68 years. The mean age
of patients described in the confirmed Cinryze–
thrombotic event combination cases was
37.4 years (Table 2). The dosage reported in all
the confirmed combination cases was comparable to the labeling recommendations from the
package insert for Cinryze.
We only performed BCPNN analyses on confirmed cases of Cinryze-associated thrombotic
events. Potential signals were generated when
examining the particular combination of confirmed cases of Cinryze-associated thrombotic
events. This suggests that the particular combination of Cinryze-associated thrombotic events

Table 2. Characteristics of the 10 Confirmed and Seven Possible Cases of Cinryze-Associated Thrombotic Events
Age (yrs),
Sex

Specific Thrombotic Event Reported

Confirmed cases
32, F
68, F
63, M
38, F
36, F
37, F

Deep vein thrombosis
Transient ischemic attack
Myocardial infarction
Jugular vein thrombosis
Jugular vein thrombosis
Pulmonary embolism

31, F
28, M
31, F
10, F
Possible cases
57, F

54, F
46, F
49, F
44, F
31, F
15, F

Deep vein thrombosis
Pulmonary embolism
Embolic stroke, intracardiac
thrombus
Transient ischemic attack
Hypotension, lactic acidosis,
hemodynamic instability,
cardiac disorder, abdominal
pain, acute renal failure
Ischemic colitis
Back pain, hereditary angioedema,
musculoskeletal pain,
pain in extremity
Cardiac flutter
Intestinal ischemia, ileus,
duodenitis, colitis
Transient blindness, migraine
Supraventricular tachycardia

Outcome Reporteda
Hospitalizationb
Otherc
Hospitalization,b otherc
Otherc
Hospitalizationb
Other,c hospitalization,b
life-threatening
Hospitalizationb
Hospitalization,b otherc
Hospitalizationb
Hospitalizationb
Hospitalization,b death

Hospitalizationb
Otherc
Otherc
Hospitalization,b otherc
Otherc
Hospitalizationb

For all cases, Cinryze was administered for prophylaxis to patients with hereditary angioedema in the United States.
a
More than one outcome may be reported for each case.
b
Initial or prolonged hospitalization.
c
Other serious outcome.

C1 ESTERASE INHIBITOR PRODUCT–ASSOCIATED THROMBOTIC EVENTS Gandhi et al
was reported to the database more often than
statistically expected from reports available in
the database. A signal, represented by an IC025
value greater than zero (IC025 = 2.91), was generated for confirmed cases of Cinryze-associated
thrombotic event combination case reports.
In addition to the 10 confirmed combination
cases, seven combination cases characterized as
possible were identified (Table 2). Similar to the
confirmed cases, Cinryze was reported as the primary suspect drug for all seven reports. The mean
age of patients reported in the possible Cinryze–
thrombotic event combination case reports was
42.3 years (Table 2). The addition of the seven
possible case reports to the 10 confirmed reports
strengthens the signal of thrombotic events
reported in patients using Cinryze.
Discussion
Overall, the retrospective data mining analysis
in this study provides an insight into the AERS
database regarding potential signals of thrombotic events associated with the use of C1 esterase inhibitor products in patients with HAE in
the United States. Since its approval, Cinryze
has been associated with 10 distinct cases of
thrombotic events reported in AERS; no signals
were found with Berinert or Kalbitor. The
BCPNN analyses highlighted an association
between the use of Cinryze and the reports of
thrombotic events in the AERS database. The
BCPNN technique was used as a means to supplement signal detection but not to draw final
conclusions. The potential signals generated for
Cinryze-associated thrombotic events provide an
additional perspective to the FDA reports of
thrombotic events associated with the use of
Cinryze. The positive IC value found in this
study merits continued surveillance and assessment of the quality and credibility of the
reported adverse events associated with the
drug; however, positive IC values for drug–
adverse event combination case reports do not
prove causal linkage. On the other hand, negative IC values for the drug–adverse event combination cases in AERS do not suggest that the
adverse event is not associated with the drug of
interest. Instead, the negative IC values may be
due to the lower number of drug–adverse event
combination case reports in the database. Nonetheless, positive IC values merit our study findings where thrombotic events associated with
the use of Cinryze were identified in patients
with HAE.

907

Due to the inherent limitations of AERS and
data mining algorithms, a causal link between
an investigated drug and adverse event cannot
be established.21, 26 The differential reporting of
drugs depending on the therapeutic class and
the patient population exposed, along with the
increased probability of reporting adverse events
in the first few years of marketing, restrict the
inference of causality between a drug and
adverse event.27 Although BCPNN analyses have
the potential to improve pharmacovigilance
screening processes, their application in identifying drug–adverse event combination cases in less
than four reports has been questioned.24 One
study suggested that less than four drug-associated adverse event reports seldom influence
pairwise IC analysis between the investigated
drug and adverse event.24 The BCPNN approach
has been routinely used for generating signal
detection by identifying potential associations
between the investigated drug and adverse
event.21–24, 27
Previous reports of Cinryze-associated thrombotic events were found in patients using offlabel C1 esterase inhibitor products at high
doses.12 In contrast, the thrombotic events identified in our study were associated with Cinryze
administered at a dosage of 1000 units intravenously every 3–4 days, which is the dosage
recommended in the product’s labeling. 12 Our
study findings merit attention, as thrombotic
events were reported in patients using Cinryze
at normal doses. As stated in the product’s package insert, Cinryze-associated thrombotic events
are more likely to be related to the use of catheters.12 Future research should investigate the
mechanism of Cinryze-associated thrombotic
events that may occur due to use of catheters,
off-label high doses, or other plausible
explanations.
An open-label study found five serious thrombotic
events (myocardial infarction, deep vein thrombosis,
pulmonary embolism, and two cerebrovascular accidents) in patients using Cinryze for prevention of
HAE attacks.12 Comparable to these findings, the
adverse event reports extracted from the AERS database identified Cinryze-associated deep vein thrombosis, transient ischemic attack, myocardial
infarction, jugular vein thrombosis, pulmonary
embolism, and embolic stroke. Considering the serious risks of Cinryze-associated thrombotic events
identified by the FDA18 and the potential signals
found in our study, continued surveillance is recommended. Nevertheless, future pharmacoepidemiologic studies should be conducted on underlying risk

908

PHARMACOTHERAPY Volume 32, Number 10, 2012

factors for thrombotic events. The AERS does not
provide clinical evidence that may assist in establishing the causal link between an investigated drug and
reports of specific adverse events. It is possible that a
thrombotic event may be related to the underlying
disease being treated or due to concurrent drugs.27
Regardless of the general limitations and biases inherent to the AERS data set, the application of BCPNN
in our study provides credence to potential signals of
thrombotic events associated with the drug of interest. In addition, consistent with the guidelines
endorsed by the International Society of Pharmacovigilance and International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology when reporting adverse drug reaction
reports,28 our study provides relevant and available
information highlighting potential cases of thrombotic events associated with the use of Cinryze in
patients with HAE.
Our exploratory analysis was used as a means
to generate hypotheses, not to confirm potential
signals of thrombotic events associated with the
use of C1 esterase inhibitor products. Any suspicion raised through this analysis may need
further examination in some follow-up procedure. For example, the combination cases
should be substantiated with clinical caseby-case analysis before making any regulatory
decision.22, 25 Our study, however, may have
implications for how C1 esterase inhibitor products and the disease condition should be discussed with a similar patient group. Until
further evidence generating the causal link
between Cinryze and thrombotic events is established, health care professionals and patients
should be educated regarding the causes and
complexity involved in diagnosing the disease
condition and potential adverse events associated with the drug.
Conclusion
The extracted reports from the AERS database
indicated continuing cases of thrombotic events
associated with the use of Cinryze for HAE.
Although AERS is not capable of detecting the
true frequency of an adverse event associated
with a drug or examining the actual causal relationship, the extracted combination cases of Cinryze-associated thrombotic events indicate that
continued surveillance and future epidemiologic
study may be needed. Evidence suggests that
data mining and BCPNN analyses are effective
tools to identify potential drug–adverse drug
reaction signals in spontaneously reported data
sets such as the AERS.

References
1. Zuraw BL. Hereditary angioedema. N Engl J Med
2008;359:1027–36.
2. Levy JH, O’Donnell PS. The therapeutic potential of a kallikrein inhibitor for treating hereditary angioedema. Expert Opin
Invest Drugs 2006;15:1077–90.
3. Davis AE III. The pathophysiology of hereditary angioedema.
Clin Immunol 2005;114:3–9.
4. Zuraw BL. HAE therapies: past, present and future. Allergy
Asthma Clin Immunol 2010;6:23.
5. Bowen T, Cicardi M, Bork K, et al. Hereditary angioedema: a
current state-of-the-art review, VII: Canadian Hungarian 2007
International consensus algorithm for the diagnosis, therapy,
and management of hereditary angioedema. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 2008;100:S30–40.
6. Bork K, Guel D, Hardt J, Dewald G. Hereditary angioedema
with normal C1 inhibitor: clinical symptoms and course. Am J
Med 2007;120:987–92.
7. Bowen T, Cicardi M, Farkas H, et al. 2010 International consensus algorithm for the diagnosis, therapy and management
of hereditary angioedema. Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol
2010;6:24.
8. Bork K, Wulff K, Hardt J, Witzke G, Staubach P. Hereditary
angioedema caused by missense mutations in the factor XII
gene: clinical features, trigger factors, and therapy. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2009;124:129–34.
9. Bork K, Meng G, Staubach P, Hardt J. Hereditary angioedema:
new findings concerning symptoms, affected organs, and
course. Am J Med 2006;119:267–74.
10. Agostoni A, Cicardi M. Hereditary and acquired C1-inhibitor
deficiency: biological and clinical characteristics in 235
patients. Medicine 1992;72:206–15.
11. Sardana N, Craig T. Recent advances in management and treatment of hereditary angioedema. Periatrics 2011;128:1173–80.
12. Lev Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Cinryze (C1 esterase inhibitor
[human]) package insert. New York, NY; 2008. Available
from
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/
BloodBloodProducts/ApprovedProducts/LicensedProductsBLAs/
FractionatedPlasmaProducts/UCM129918. Accessed January
18, 2012.
13. CSL Behring GmbH. Berinert. (C1 esterase inhibitor [human])
package insert. Marburg, Germany; 2009.
14. Dyax Corporation. Kalbitor (DX-88 [ecallantide]) package
insert. Cambridge, MA; 2009.
15. Shire. Firazyr (icatibant) pakage insert. Wayne, PA; 2011.
Available from http://pi.shirecontent.com/PI/PDFs/Firazyr_USA_
ENG.pdf. Accessed January 18, 2012.
16. Toscani M, Riedl M. Meeting the challenges and burdens associated with hereditary angioedema. Manag Care 2011;20:44–51.
17. Sheffer AL, Campion M, Levy RJ, Li HH, Horn PT, Pullman
WE. Ecallantide (DX-88) for acute hereditary angioedema:
integrated analysis of 2 double-blind, phase 3 studies. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2011;128:153–9.
18. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Potential signals of serious risks/new safety information identified by the Adverse
Event Reporting System (AERS) between January–March 2010.
Available from http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceCompliance
RegulatoryInformation/Surveillance/AdverseDrugEffects/ucm
216272.htm. Accessed March 2, 2012.
19. Piccinni C, Marchesini G, Motola G, Poluzzi E. Assessing the
association of pioglitazone use and bladder cancer through
drug adverse event reporting. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1369–71.
20. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. The Adverse Event
Reporting System (AERS) latest quarterly data files. Available
from http://www.fda.gov/cder/aers/extract.htm. Accessed January 18, 2012.
21. Hauben M, Reich L, Gerrits CM. Reports of hyperkalemia
after publication of RALES—a pharmacovigilance study. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2006;15:775–83.
22. van Puijenbroek EP, Bate A, Leufkens HGM, Lidquist M,
Orre R, Egberts ACG. A comparison of measures of disproportionality for signal detection in spontaneous reporting

C1 ESTERASE INHIBITOR PRODUCT–ASSOCIATED THROMBOTIC EVENTS Gandhi et al
systems for adverse drug reactions. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug
Saf 2002;11:3–10.
23. Bate A, Lindquist M, Edwards IR, et al. A Bayesian neural
network method for adverse drug reaction signal generation.
Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1998;54(4):315–21.
24. Noren GN, Bate A, Orre R, Edwards IR. Extending the methods used to screen the WHO drug safety database towards
analysis of complex associations and improved accuracy for
rare events. Stat Med 2006;25:3740–57.
25. Lindquist M, Stahl M, Bate A, Edwards IR, Meyboom
RHB. A retrospective evaluation of a data mining approach
to aid finding new adverse drug reaction signals in

909

the WHO International Database. Drug Saf 2000;23(6):533–
42.
26. Hauben M, Madigan D, Gerrits CM, Walsh L, Van Puijenbroek EP. The role of data mining in pharmacovigilance. Expert
Opin Drug Saf 2005;4(5):929–48.
27. Ratcliffe S, Younus M, Hauben M, Reich L. Antidepressants
that inhibit neuronal norepinephrine reuptake are not associated with increased spontaneous reporting of cardiomyopathy.
J Psychopharmacol 2010;24:503–11.
28. Kelly WN, Arellano FM, Barnes J, et al. Guidelines for submitting adverse event reports for publication. Drug Saf
2007;30(5):367–73.

