NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. 2010 May ; 14(3): 826–837. doi:10.1109/TITB.2009.2037007.

A Distributed, Collaborative Intelligent Agent System Approach
for Proactive Postmarketing Drug Safety Surveillance
Yanqing Ji,
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Gonzaga University, Spokane, WA 99258
USA (ji@gonzaga.edu)
Hao Ying [Senior Member, IEEE],
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202
USA (hao.ying@wayne.edu)
Margo S. Farber,
Drug Information/Use Policy, Detroit Medical Center, Detroit, MI 48201 USA (mfarber@dmc.org)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

John Yen [Fellow, IEEE],
College of Information Sciences and Technology, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA 16802 USA (jyen@ist.psu.edu)
Peter Dews,
Department of Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201 USA; Department of
Medicine, St John Health Providence Hospital, Southfield, MI 48075 USA
(peter.dews@stjohn.org)
Richard E. Miller, and
John D. Dingell Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Detroit, MI 48201 USA
(remiller@med.wayne.edu)
R. Michael Massanari
Research for the Critical Junctures Institute, Bellingham, WA 98225 USA
(michael.massanari@wwu.edu)

Abstract
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Discovering unknown adverse drug reactions (ADRs) in postmarketing surveillance as early as
possible is of great importance. The current approach to postmarketing surveillance primarily
relies on spontaneous reporting. It is a passive surveillance system and limited by gross
underreporting (<10% reporting rate), latency, and inconsistent reporting. We propose a novel
team-based intelligent agent software system approach for proactively monitoring and detecting
potential ADRs of interest using electronic patient records. We designed such a system and named
it ADRMonitor. The intelligent agents, operating on computers located in different places, are
capable of continuously and autonomously collaborating with each other and assisting the human
users (e.g., the food and drug administration (FDA), drug safety professionals, and physicians).
The agents should enhance current systems and accelerate early ADR identification. To evaluate
the performance of the ADRMonitor with respect to the current spontaneous reporting approach,
we conducted simulation experiments on identification of ADR signal pairs (i.e., potential links
between drugs and apparent adverse reactions) under various conditions. The experiments
involved over 275 000 simulated patients created on the basis of more than 1000 real patients
treated by the drug cisapride that was on the market for seven years until its withdrawal by the

© 2009 IEEE
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

Ji et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

FDA in 2000 due to serious ADRs. Healthcare professionals utilizing the spontaneous reporting
approach and the ADRMonitor were separately simulated by decision-making models derived
from a general cognitive decision model called fuzzy recognition-primed decision (RPD) model
that we recently developed. The quantitative simulation results show that 1) the number of true
ADR signal pairs detected by the ADRMonitor is 6.6 times higher than that by the spontaneous
reporting strategy; 2) the ADR detection rate of the ADRMonitor agents with even moderate
decision-making skills is five times higher than that of spontaneous reporting; and 3) as the
number of patient cases increases, ADRs could be detected significantly earlier by the
ADRMonitor.

Keywords
Adverse drug reactions (ADR); fuzzy logic; intelligent agents; postmarketing surveillance;
recognition-primed decision (RPD) model

I. Introduction

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ADVERSE drug reactions (ADRs) refer to the drug-associated adverse incidents in which
drugs are used at an appropriate dose and indication. They can complicate a patient’s
medical condition or contribute to increased morbidity, even death. Drug-induced morbidity
and mortality occurs on a daily basis. The latest data that we can find in the literature show
that in year 2000, there were about 100 000 deaths in the U.S. due to medical errors, of
which about 7000 were attributed to drug reactions [1]. According to Laser et al. [2],
between 1975 and 1999, 548 new drugs were approved by the food and drug administration
(FDA), 16 (i.e., 2.9%) of which were subsequently withdrawn from the market because of
ADRs. Forty-five (8.2%) of the 548 drugs acquired at least one block box warning for an
ADR that was not known when the drug was approved by the FDA for marketing (a black
box warning is required by the FDA to appear in the drug package insert as well as in the
physician’s desk reference if substantial risk to the patient may occur or if additional
information or monitoring of drug use might prevent an adverse event). Laser et al. [2] also
pointed out that “Many serious ADRs are discovered only after a drug has been on the
market for years. Only half of newly discovered serious ADRs are detected and documented
in the Physician’s Desk Reference within 7 years after drug approval.”

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Drug safety depends heavily on postmarketing surveillance—the systematic detection and
evaluation of medicines once they have been marketed [3]. Current postmarketing methods
largely rely on FDA’s spontaneous reporting system MedWatch. The limitations of this
system are well described [4]. MedWatch is a passive system in that it depends on voluntary,
spontaneous reports of suspected ADRs to be filed by healthcare professionals, drug
manufactures, and/or consumers using the system’s online forms. Detection of an ADR
generally relies on FDA’s retrospective or concurrent review of patient cases. Because ADR
reports are filed at the discretion of the users of the system, there is gross underreporting [5],
[6]. It was estimated that less than 10% of all ADR cases were reported to MedWatch [2].
Moreover, it depends on human recognition of a potential link between a drug and an
apparent adverse reaction (called signal pair), and on the time and will to report the
observation [7]. In addition, the rate at which cases are reported is dependent on many
factors, including the time period since the drug was released into the market place,
pharmacovigilance-related regulatory activity, the indications for use of the drug (which
impacts prescribing frequency), and media attention [8]. Finally, the passive surveillance
system is limited by latency and inconsistent [9]. Consequently, the current approach may
require years to identify and withdraw problematic drugs from the market, and result in
unnecessary mortality, morbidity, and cost of healthcare.
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Systematic methods for the detection of suspected safety problems from spontaneous reports
have been studied and practically implemented [10]. For example, the FDA currently adopts
a data mining algorithm called multiitem gamma Poissson shrinker [11] for detecting
potential signals from its spontaneous reports. Another important signal detection strategy is
known as the Bayesian confidence propagation neural network that has been used by the
Uppsala Monitoring Center in routine pharmacovigilance with its World Health
Organization database [12]. However, a large number of cases are needed in order for the
neural network approach to work. Various other methods, such as proportional reporting
ratios [13], empirical Bayes screening [14], reporting odds ratios [15], and incidence rate
ratios [16] have been used in the spontaneous reporting centers of other nations (e.g.,
England and Australian). By utilizing data mining or Bayesian techniques, these methods
have shown better performance than traditional methods even though the ability of detecting
a signal varies among them [17]. However, the performance of these techniques could be
highly situation dependent due to the weaknesses and potential biases inherent in
spontaneous reporting [18]. When confounding exists, the signals generated by a data
mining algorithm may not represent a true causal-effect relationship between ADRs and the
drugs.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this paper, we present the design of an innovative team-based intelligent agent software
system, ADRMonitor, at conceptual level for actively monitoring and detecting signal pairs
of ADRs. While current data mining methods for ADR detection rely on the spontaneous
reports, our approach utilizes a different source of information—the electronic patient
records, representing a new direction of ADR signal generation. As a result, it is possible for
the proposed system to detect ADR signal pairs earlier when only a small number of cases
exist that can be too few evidence for the data mining methods even to be applicable. Like
the other methods, the signal pairs found by our approach will be subject to further analysis
(e.g. epidemiology study) and case review and interpretation by expert drug safety
professionals experienced in the nuances of pharmacoepidemiology and clinical medicine
[19]. To the best of our knowledge, an agent approach to drug safety has never been
suggested in the literature.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Intelligent agents are “smart” software programs that act on behalf of human users to find
and filter information, negotiate for services, automate complex tasks, and collaborate with
other software agents to solve complex problems [20]. Intelligent agents share some
common characteristics, including autonomy, collaboration, delegation, and communication
skills. A team-based agent system (i.e., multiagent system) may be defined as “a collection
of autonomous agents that communicate between themselves to coordinate their activities in
order to be able to solve collectively a problem that could not be tackled by any agent
individually” [21]. In this paper, we use the terms “multiagent system” and “team-based
agent system” interchangeably. The multiagent technology provides a new paradigm for
developing software applications in a variety of fields, such as industry, commerce,
entertainment, and military [22], [23]. In the healthcare domain, exemplary applications
include the agent architecture for distributed medical care (AADCare) system for integrating
the patient management processes [24], the Organ Transplant Management system for the
management of organ and tissue transplants among different medical centers [25], and the
internal hospital tasks management systems for monitoring the application of medical
protocols [26]. To date, the number of biomedical applications is still very limited.
We will present a multiagent system design of the ADRMonitor that covers both the
national level (i.e., the FDA) and the healthcare system level. At the current stage, we focus
on three important system-level questions concerning the proposed system and will provide
quantitative answers via simulation study in this paper. (Now that the simulation outcomes
have pointed to the value of ADRMonitor, as a logical step, we are implementing it in a

IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 4

clinical setting. We will report the evaluation results in the future). The questions are as
follows.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1.

Is the detection performance of the ADRMonitor better than that of the
spontaneous reporting approach? What are quantifiable differences?

2.

What should the levels of the agents’ decision-making skills be in order for the
ADRMonitor to outperform the spontaneous reporting approach at the best
reporting rate in practice (i.e., 10%)?

3.

How does the number of patient cases affect the detection performance of the
ADRMonitor?

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces our multiagent
system design. Section III describes in detail the experimental design and simulation to
address these three issues. In Section IV, the simulation results are reported. We wrap up
with conclusions in Section V.

II. Design of the Collaborative Team-Based System Adrmonitor

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this section, we introduce the overall architecture and functionality of the ADRMonitor,
its agent organization and management, as well as the cognitive decision model used by an
agent.
A. ADRMonitor Architecture and Functionalities

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1) Overall Architecture of ADRMonitor—The overall structure of the ADRMonitor is
shown in Fig. 1. The FDA is at the top of this structure, since it is the drug administration
authority. Many healthcare systems are connected with the FDA through the Internet. Note
that a healthcare system can be a hospital, a medical center, a sizable clinic, the Medicare
program, a health insurance company, or any other organizations that can provide healthrelated electronic data for identifying potential drug safety signals. Experts in the FDA and
healthcare professionals in local healthcare systems have their own intelligent agents, which
would collaborate with each other in order to effectively identify unknown ADRs. These
intelligent agents are accessible by any computer connected to the Internet. Both the FDA
and the healthcare systems have their own databases. The database in the FDA stores the
spontaneous reports filed by healthcare professionals, consumers, etc. These reports are
valuable for experts at the FDA to conduct population level analyses (e.g., data mining and
epidemiological study) as well as case analysis. The databases at each local healthcare
system contain detailed information (e.g., pharmacy data and clinical laboratory data) of its
patients. The data are important since they provide, among other information, direct or
indirect evidence of the clinical state, comorbid conditions, and the progress of the patients
[27].
Safety evaluators at the FDA regularly assess the spontaneous reports. Each of them would
have an intelligent agent to help him/her perform his/her duty (e.g., requesting details of a
particular suspected patient case and/or similar patient cases from local healthcare systems
via their intelligent agents). Detecting unknown ADRs is a complex process, often requiring
expertise from a variety of specialists (e.g., physicians, pharmacists, chemists, and
epidemiologists). At the FDA, each of these experts would have his/her own intelligent
agent to assist in performing various analyses (e.g., epidemiologic studies) and gathering
necessary information. There can be multiple safety evaluator agents, pharmacist agents, and
epidemiologist agents, although only one of each is illustrated in Fig. 1.
2) ADRMonitor Architecture at the Local Level—The detailed agent architecture in a
healthcare system is presented in Fig. 2. Note that we use a medical center as an example to
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

illustrate the agent system architecture. For other types of healthcare systems (e.g., health
insurance company), the agent architecture would be similar while the local users and their
intelligent agents could be different. In a medical center, there can be multiple safety officer
agents and more than one other professional agent, although only one of each is illustrated in
Fig. 2. The agent users in such a healthcare system include physicians, drug safety officers/
managers, and other healthcare professionals (e.g., pharmacists and nurses). These agents
would collect useful information and help the local users identify signal pairs of potential
ADRs. There are four different data collection and monitoring agents, each of which
corresponds to a specific type of data source for ADR detection (i.e., administration
database, pharmacy database, laboratory database, and electronic patient medical records).
These agents will receive data collection tasks from other agents, and then, query the
corresponding databases for desired data. Furthermore, they continuously monitor their
respective databases and proactively provide data to agents who need them. Administrative
coding of diagnoses and procedures is a routine part of billing procedures for medical care
and is a universally available electronic data source that can be utilized in ADR surveillance.
These data are coded in the form of International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Edition,
Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) and physicians’ Current Procedural Terminology (CPT),
two widely used coding standards. Pharmacy data, clinical laboratory data, and patient
medical records are the three other sources of information.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

All the professional agents (e.g., the physician agents) use the recognition-primed decision
(RPD) model while the other agents, such as the management agents, and data collection
and monitoring agents, do not. Since the human professionals are responsible for submitting
spontaneous reports, the RPD model would help them assess the strength of causality of
signal pairs (i.e., ADRs). Different types of professional agents (e.g., physician agents
versus pharmacist agents) have different domain knowledge bases to map the fact that
different types of professionals have different expertise and would evaluate signal pairs from
different perspectives. (Experts’ initial knowledge about a new drug can be obtained by
analyzing the results of the premarketing clinical trials and the medical literature, as well as
by using their prior ADR experience in the other drugs that are in the same class as the new
drug.) For the same type of agents, we assume that different agents use the same cues to
assess signal pairs, but they may view the cues differently in order to reflect different levels
of skills of different professionals. For example, different physician agents may have
different weights on the cues or different definitions of the membership functions for the
same fuzzy cue. Note that there may exist inconsistencies among the agents in that different
agents have different expertise and different levels of skills. One assumption of this study is
that medical expertise and skills are not uniform across agents. This is true for the ADR
problem, for example, all the spontaneous reports submitted to the FDA are based on
personal recognition and assessment of perceived adverse effects. However, we do believe
that collaborations among intelligent agents with complementary expertise would help to
make more accurate evaluation of signal pairs. We will explore this in our future work.
We suppose that no conflicts exist in the agent community over resource sharing because the
system is not very time critical and a slight ADR detection delay (e.g., in minutes) is
acceptable. We believe that all the competing requests from different agents to access the
resources can be adequately managed if the system is properly designed.
3) Functionalities of ADRMonitor—With this system design, the safety evaluators at
the FDA have at least three ways to discover unknown ADRs, which are complementary to
one another. First, they could apply a current data mining algorithm to collected spontaneous
ADR reports. Second, they could perform patient-specific ADR reviews by analyzing the
details (e.g., temporal relationship between taking a drug and occurrence of an apparent
adverse event, concurrent medications, and important laboratory data) of the relevant
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

individual patient cases collected by their agents. Third, their agents could help them
perform epidemiologic analyses at the population level by collecting similar cases
distributed across all the healthcare systems, and in association with epidemiologists, assist
them to design epidemiologic studies (e.g., case-control or cohort studies). The safety
evaluators’ intelligent agents could also track further development of the suspected patient
cases under the help of the agents in the local healthcare systems. For example, a safety
evaluator may be interested in what happens to the patient after the suspected drug is
discontinued. In general, the safety evaluators could more easily determine the causal
relationship between a potential ADR and a drug.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In the proposed agent architecture, all the intelligent agents at the FDA and different
healthcare systems would collaborate with each other and assist the FDA’s safety evaluators
to more effectively make decisions. For example, after analyzing a spontaneous report
concerning an unknown potential ADR, the safety evaluator may need similar cases in order
to further analyze whether a true causal relationship exists in this particular drug–ADR pair.
Therefore, the safety evaluator could send the information request via his/her intelligent
agent to the management agents at different local healthcare systems, which will then
forward the request to the corresponding data collection and monitoring agents. These
agents would search the local databases and provide similar cases to the evaluator.
Furthermore, the data collection and monitoring agents could continuously monitor their
databases in order to find future similar cases, and proactively forward them to the relevant
safety evaluator agents. After receiving the collected information, the safety evaluator will
make a further analysis. He/she may need the inputs of other experts at the FDA (e.g.,
pharmacists and epidemiologists) before deciding what to do with this signal pair. At the
local healthcare system level, different intelligent agents can also help each other (e.g., a
physician agent may need inputs from a safety officer agent before it files a report).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

There are several ways to trigger the collaborative surveillance process of the ADRMonitor
at the local healthcare system level or at the national level. First, the system can always
monitor some potential adverse effects like death and hospitalization for any new drugs of
interest. These adverse effects can be predetermined and entered into the system by a safety
evaluator at the FDA or a safety officer in a local healthcare system, which trigger the
surveillance process. Second, a safety evaluator or a drug safety officer/manager can
anticipate and enter (through his/her software agent) a list of suspected drug–ADR signal
pairs based on premarketing clinical trials, and the drug’s pharmacodynamic and
pharmacokinetic characteristics, which are available at the FDA. Third, a safety evaluator or
a safety officer/manager can actively trigger this system at any time when he/she receives
reports or information from other sources (e. g., the safety alerts issued by the FDA and new
case reports in the literature) that raises concerns about possible ADRs. Fourth, once a
physician finds potential adverse effects on his/her patient, he/she can, with the help of his/
her agent, search more information or simply file a report to the safety officer or to the FDA,
which will trigger the surveillance process for that drug.
In general, intelligent agents at different levels could collaborate with each other in order to
monitor different data resources, collect information, make decisions, and share decisionmaking results. Communications among agents and the networking scalability are two major
advantages of the ADRMonitor system. When more healthcare systems are connected to the
ADRMonitor, the ability to detect rare ADR signal pairs would be greatly enhanced.
B. Agent Organization and Management
The organization and management of intelligent agents is a very important issue in a large
distributed multiagent system. To address this issue, we propose a hybrid agent organization
strategy based on our analysis of the system’s requirements and constraints (e.g. privacy,
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

scalability, security, and generality). Within each healthcare system, the unique management
agent and many healthcare professional agents (each assisting a unique healthcare
professional) take the classic client/server model, which is widely used for distributed
applications. In this model, while the server node provides most of the services or
capabilities of the system, the client nodes just access and use them. In our case, the
management agent works as a server that provides services for all the healthcare
professional agents in the same healthcare system. The healthcare professional agents work
as clients who can initiate requests. In the FDA, the National Regulatory Authority Agent
and all the safety expert agents also use the client/server model.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

At the healthcare system level, a client/server model would not be desirable because a
healthcare system is expected to be an autonomous peer that can initiate communication and
provide capabilities for other healthcare systems. One possible solution is to use the peer-topeer (P2P) model, where all the peers are treated equally and the service is distributed
among all the peers of the network. However, for the pure P2P model, it is difficult to
maintain the coherence of the network and discover new peers. Also security is an important
issue for the pure P2P model, since each node is allowed to join the network without any
control mechanism. We thus take the hybrid model, a model between the client/server model
and the pure P2P model. That is, a high-level node (i.e., the National Regulatory Authority
Agent) is added to the top of all the healthcare systems and at the same time different
healthcare systems can still communicate with each other through their management agents.
The National Regulatory Authority Agent has the highest authority from the perspective of
agent management in the whole agent framework. For example, all the intelligent agents at
the FDA and all the management agents in healthcare systems (see Fig. 2) must be
registered and authenticated through this Agent before they can be recognized by other
agents in the framework. To avoid being a possible communication bottleneck, the National
Regulatory Authority Agent only provides necessary services (e.g., providing name–
physical address associations for new comers). Moreover, the caching mechanism can be
implemented for each healthcare system so that the name-physical address associations are
stored locally and the National Regulatory Authority Agent is contacted only when the
address information is missing.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Scalability is another major issue in a large distributed system. To reduce communication
overhead, it is reasonable to divide people as well as their supporting agents into different
groups or teams. For instance, a group of experts and their agents focusing on a particular
ADR can form a (virtual) team. Of course, a human expert and his supporting agent could be
a member in multiple teams. The formation of a virtual team would be transparent to the end
users. When a safety expert makes a query or a healthcare professional provides supporting
information, he/she can be automatically added to a team according to the suspicious drug
(or its class) and the suspected adverse outcome. To achieve this, we need to find a strategy
of classifying drugs on the market and embed the classification information in our proposed
framework. The National Drug Code (NDC) system is chosen as a therapeutic or
pharmacological classification scheme in which each NDC, a unique ten-digit number,
serves as a universal product identifier for drugs reported to the FDA.
A more concrete and technical description of the agents, their functions and roles, as well as
hierarchy formalization in the context of ADR detection can be found in our previous
reports [28], [29].
The remaining issues include agent communication, interoperability, and service registry.
We have found that the Java agent development environment (JADE [30]), one of the agent
system development software packages, can readily handle them. We are using it to
implement these aspects of ADRMonitor. JADE is an integrated tool suite for constructing,

IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

managing, and testing intelligent software agents. It fully complies with the Foundation for
Intelligent Physical Agents (FIPA) specifications and adopts FIPA ACL as agent
communication language. The FIPA standards allow agents effectively interoperate with
each other. JADE also provides agent management, a white-page service through which an
agent can register and discover other agents, and a yellow-page service through which an
agent can publish and search for “services.” An agent is allowed to subscribe services.
Whenever a service registration or modification is made, the agent will be notified.
C. Fuzzy RPD Model

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Each intelligent agent of the healthcare professionals and the safety experts is equipped with
a cognitive decision-making model to characterize the agent’s decision-making behavior.
There exist two different categories of cognitive decision-making models. One is the rational
decision-making approach [31], and the other is naturalistic decision making. The RPD
model [32] is a popular model of the latter category with a solid theoretical foundation. It is
particularly useful when used to model how human experts make decisions based on their
prior experiences. The RPD model focuses on situation assessment due to the fact that
experts spend most of their time and energy on understanding the decision situation, and that
once the situation is recognized, decision making is almost automatic. One study showed
that 50% to 80% of all decisions were made in this way [33], while another investigation
indicated that 95% of all the decisions made by the naval officers on a cruiser followed the
RPD model [34]. We chose to use the RPD model to represent the decision-making behavior
of the ADRMonitor’s agents. The original RPD model is descriptive and is not directly
implementable on a computer. Hence, we developed a fuzzy RPD model [35], which is not
only computational, but also capable of handling vague and subjective information using
fuzzy logic [36], [37].
RPD is an experience-based model that employs “situation-experience matching” decision
rules to determine, which prior experience can be utilized to solve the current problem. The
experiences acquired by solicitation with the physicians on our project team were stored in
an experience knowledge base. Fig. 3 is a sample experience illustrated in natural language
for easier understanding.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As shown, an experience consists of four components—cues, goals, actions, and
expectancies. Cues represent the higher-level information (synthesized from elementary or
environmental data) that a decision maker must pay attention to. Expectancies describe what
will happen next as the current situation continues to evolve in a changing context. Goals
represent an end state that the decision maker is trying to achieve. Actions represent a set of
potential decisions that the decision maker can take in the current situation. Cues are used to
match the current situation with prior experiences. This sample experience has four cues:
temporal association, other explanation, dechallenge, and rechallenge. Temporal association
refers to the temporal relationship between taking the drug and occurrence of the adverse
event. Other explanations denote alternative explanations by concurrent disease or other
drugs. Dechallenge is defined as the relationship between withdrawal of the drug and
abatement of the adverse effect. Rechallenge describes the relationship between
reintroduction of the drug and recurrence of the adverse event. The type of a cue could be
quantitative, nominal, or fuzzy in the proposed computational fuzzy RPD model. For
instance, the cue temporal association may have fuzzy values (e.g. unlikely, possible, and
likely). The weights for these cues are design parameters and are assigned by domain
experts. Table I shows that how the four cues are related to degree of causality of a signal
pair and gives four examples.
The experience knowledge base is an integral part of the fuzzy RPD model [38]. It is for the
task of assessing suspected ADR signal pairs, and is built through the joint efforts of our
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

engineering and medical team members after careful analysis of the relevant literature.
According to the classification scheme in [39], a particular pattern of cue values
characterizes a specific degree of causality, which may require certain courses of action to
handle the ADR. Therefore, we can define various experiences, each of which is associated
with a degree of causality (e.g., very likely, probable, and possible). These experiences form
the experience knowledge base. The number of experiences in the base is related to the
complexity of the ADR detection objectives and the base is scalable in that more (or less)
experiences can be added (or deleted) when needed. The addition and deletion can be
manual, or conceptually automatic.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

After representing the experiences, the next step is to extract the cue values from elementary
data for the current situation. Fuzzy rules and fuzzy reasoning are used to achieve this task.
For example, to obtain the fuzzy value of temporal association, one of the fuzzy rule “if the
time duration between taking the drug and the occurrence of the adverse event is short, then
temporal association is likely” is used. An embedded fuzzy inference engine is employed to
perform fuzzy reasoning. The inference engine is what drives the RPD model, updating cues
once new information is detected, and monitoring expectancies and goals. After the cue
values of the current situation are known, similarity measures are needed to measure the
degree of matching between the current situation and prior experiences. We developed our
own similarity measures to identify the experience that was applicable to the current
situation in a specific decision-making context. Once the most applicable experience is
identified, the action(s) in that experience is used to solve the current problem.
Fuzzy rules and fuzzy reasoning were implemented using the freeware fuzzyjess [40], a
Java-based fuzzy inference engine. It allows the user to use Java language to define
membership functions, set antecedent, and consequent of a fuzzy rule, and make a fuzzy
inference. This made it easier to integrate the reasoning process with the other parts of the
RPD model, which were also implemented with Java.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

From the perspective of reusing prior experiences/cases to solve current problems, the RPD
model is similar to case-based reasoning. However, the RPD is different from case-based
reasoning in several aspects: 1) RPD originates from cognitive studies about how human
experts make decisions. In some sense, it is a more complete and systematic model
developed to specifically describe the cognitive decision-making process; 2) the decision
making in RPD is more viewed as a gradual, iterative procedure instead of one critical
momentary decision—this feature makes it more appropriately to capture the decisionmaking process in domains like medicine; and 3) RPD stresses the real-world decisionmaking settings with time constraints, voluminous information, ill-structured problems, etc.
In addition, our integration of RPD and intelligent agents enables constant tracking and
monitoring of the decision process. For instance, once new information violates the
“expectancies” of the model, prior decisions will be reevaluated. For more details of the
fuzzy RPD model as well as concrete examples, the reader is referred to our previous study
[35].
The fuzzy RPD model was preliminarily validated by first optimizing it, and then, using the
resulting model to calculate the extent of causality between cisapride and some of its
adverse effects for 100 simulated patients created based on the profiles of the same 1015
Veterans Affairs (VA) Medical Center patients mentioned earlier. There were 18 model
parameters, which included four weights for different cues and 14 parameters to characterize
the fuzzy sets used in the fuzzy RPD model. They were optimized using a genetic algorithm
so that the model could best mimic the decisions of the two physicians at the same time (i.e.,
mimic their underlying consensus). We tried different settings of the genetic algorithm so as
to obtain an optimal result within a modest computing time. The genetic algorithm’s (GA)

IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 10

elitism rate and cullage rate were set at 0.05 and 0.4, respectively. A two-point crossover
and a mutation with mutation rate of 0.01 were applied to generate new members.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The model’s validity was then established by comparing the decisions made by the
optimized model and those by two independent experienced internists for the 100 simulated
patients. The levels of agreements were measured by the weighted Kappa statistic, which is
an estimate of agreement between two raters after chance agreement is controlled. Kappa
statistic ranges from 1 (complete agreement) to 0 (totally disagreement). As suggested by
Landis and Koch [41], agreement is considered to be excellent when the weighted Kappa
statistic is over 0.75, fair to good when it is between 0.4 and 0.75, and poor when it is less
than 0.4. In our case, the Kappa statistics for physicians 1 and 2 versus the geneticalgorithm-optimized model were 0.939 and 0.7, respectively, while the statistic for physician
1 versus physician 2 was 0.657. The results suggested good to excellent agreements [35].

III. Simulation Study

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Reporting rate of the ADRMonitor is effectively 100% because it continuously monitors the
data sources and the agents collaborate consistently to detect potential ADRs. Conceptually,
it should have the potential to outperform the current spontaneous reporting approach given
that the intelligent agents could actively track patient cases, alert physicians regarding
potential new ADRs, and provide more detailed information to safety officers. We will
quantify the performance through computer simulation. Another important issue is as
follows. From the perspective of artificial intelligence (AI), it is very difficult to equip each
of the intelligent agents with the same high level of decision-making skills that human
experts possess. The individual agents’ decision-making skills will likely be inferior to
experienced healthcare professionals. Logically, in order for the ADRMonitor to be superior
to the current system, it is essential that the agents collectively have better signal pair
detection performance than experienced human experts who fail to report over 90%
potential ADR cases (i.e., less than 10% reporting rate). We now explore the answer to this
question using simulation. Last but not least, how does the increase of patient cases affect
the ADR detection performance of the ADRMonitor? Conceptually speaking, ADRs are
difficult to detect when the number of patient cases is small. If more physician groups, and
in turn more patient cases, are included in the multiagent network, the rate of detection will
be greatly accelerated. To explore this issue quantitatively, we will simulate and compare
ADRMonitor’ detection process when different numbers of physician groups are connected.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In all of the simulations concerning these three issues, we assume that agents collaborate
efficiently and that they can access the desired information instantaneously. A similar
assumption is applied to the spontaneous reporting approach—the healthcare professionals
have all the necessary information handy for filing a report. Note that, in this paper, we
focus on evaluating the performance of a group of physician agents. Other professional
agents are not evaluated because at this stage our primary goal is to design a multiagent
framework (i.e., ADR-Monitor) and establish its superiority in detecting drug–ADR pairs
relative to the spontaneous reporting approach using simulation. Physician agents are chosen
because physicians hold the key to ADR detection and are reporting many more (possible)
ADRs than other healthcare professionals. For example, after studying all those spontaneous
reports submitted to the FDA by different healthcare professionals in 2008, we found that
physicians reported 57.5% of the total cases, while pharmacists and other professionals
reported 11.4% and 31.1% of the total cases, respectively.
A. Real Patient Data as a Basis for Simulation Investigation
The drug cisapride was introduced into the marketplace in 1993 upon approval by the FDA
for the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux. Seven years later the drug was removed from
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

the marketplace because of idiosyncratic, high-risk adverse reactions. With approvals from
the Human Investigation Committees of Wayne State University (WSU) and the VA
Medical Center in Detroit, we retrieved all the patients treated with cisapride at the VA
Medical Center between 1993 and 2000. The sources for the data included the standard
hospital discharge abstract database and the pharmacy database. A statistically deidentified
dataset was produced for analysis. A total of 1015 patients were found that had received
cisapride on one or more encounters in the institution. The total number of prescriptions was
2803. We found that the number of apparent signal pairs of potential ADRs (i.e., cisapride
and Torsades de Pointe, and/or syncope) in the patient data is very limited. Therefore, we
used the real patients to create simulated patient cases in order to conduct the simulation.
B. Creation of Simulated Patient Cases

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To create simulated patient cases, we utilized the real patient cases to identify the important
parameters that would provide useful information for weighing potential causal linkages
among signal pairs. The determination of the value range for each parameter was based on
the analysis of real patient data by the experienced physicians on the project team. We
generated simulated patient cases by assigning the parameters with random values within the
ranges. The case generation was accomplished in a way that simulated the observed
distribution of cisapride prescriptions over time, but at a rate that was increased 100-fold
(i.e., 280 300). The much higher number of cases was needed to represent the number of
prescriptions that would be ordered by physicians in 100 medical centers individually
comparable to our VA Medical Center. In our simulation study, we assumed that these
medical centers were connected by the ADRMonitor through computer networks. This
assumption was appropriate and reasonable because in reality it is difficult to detect ADR
signal pairs when the number of cases is small as the occurrence rate of most ADRs is low.
As a result, we obtained a total of 275 400 distinctive simulated patient cases. Based on our
literature research and the opinions of our expert physicians and biostatisticians, the
categories of signal pair strength for these simulated cases and their distribution were
estimated as: very likely (0.01% of the total cases), probable (0.02%), possible (0.02%),
unlikely (0.02%), and no pair (99.93%). For the purpose of our simulation study, a signal
pair that was labeled or evaluated as “very likely” was treated as an ADR. Thus, the ADR
occurrence rate was 0.01% (i.e., total 27 cases) among the simulated cases. All the simulated
patients were stored in a microsoft access database.
C. Simulated Physicians and Simulated ADRMonitor Agents

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1) Simulated Physicians—The optimized fuzzy RPD model introduced in Section II-C
was treated as a gold standard in this paper. We used it to create 200 different simulated
physicians in the following manner (we employed 200 because the number of internal
medicine and family medicine physicians in the WSU outpatient physician group was about
200, which was considered to be representative for major healthcare centers in the nation).
We randomly generated 50 000 sets of the parameters of the fuzzy RPD model, all within
reasonable ranges. The model with a specific set of parameters represented a particular
physician. Different parameter sets represent different physicians with various levels of
experience and decision-making skills. In order to select 200 physicians, whose decisionmaking skills have a reasonable distribution, each simulated physician evaluated the 100
simulated patient cases, and its agreement with the optimized model, as measured by
weighted Kappa statistic, was calculated. The skills of the 200 simulated physicians were
selected based on their Kappa statistics in a way that the number of physicians in each
Kappa category would roughly follow a sort of normal distribution: 15% (0–0.4), 70% (0.4–
0.75), and 15% (0.75–1.0).

IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To include physicians’ potential errors occurring in the process of evaluating patient cases,
we assumed that patient cases with no signal pairs could be mistakenly classified as ADR
signal pairs in a random fashion at a rate of 0.001%.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To address the three questions raised in the Section I, one way would be to use 100
physician groups of the same size (i.e., 200 × 100 = 20 000 physicians), since the number of
simulated patient cases was comparable to that treated by that many physicians in 100
medical centers. However, we found the computing time required to evaluate all the 275 400
simulated patients prohibitively long on our 2.0 GHz PC. Alternatively, we randomly
assigned the patients in an indirect way. We selected only 2754 from the 275 400 patient
cases to form a database, and only these 2754 cases were used in the simulation. In
selection, we kept all the cases in the categories of “very likely,” “probable,” “possible,” and
“unlikely” in the 275 400 cases and randomly picked up some cases in the category of “no
pair.” Hence, the distribution of the new patient pool was: very likely (1%), probable (2%),
possible (2%), unlikely (2%), and no pair (93%). The total number of “no pair” patients
excluded was 272 646 (i.e., 2 757 400 × 99.93%–2754 × 93%). Nevertheless, the effect that
these excluded “no pair” patients would exert on the signal pair detection was still reflected
in the simulation study. It was represented via the 0.001% physician random error rate. The
number of excluded “no pair” patients that could be mistakenly evaluated as ADR signal
pairs by the simulated physicians is 2.7 cases (i.e., 272 646 × 0.001%), which were included
in the simulation. By such an arrangement, simulations involving the 2754 simulated
patients evaluated by the 200 simulated physicians would yield results comparable to those
achieved by directly evaluating the 275 400 simulated patients by 20 000 physicians.
The same setting was applied to the ADRMonitor agents.
D. Simulated ADRMonitor Agents

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

When creating simulated ADRMonitor agents, we supposed that 1) the dedicated
ADRMonitor agent of a real physician possessed a comparable decision-making skill as the
physician did; and 2) the agent could be set up to substitute the physician for making
decisions. These assumptions are based on the expectation that an agent can gradually and
continuously learn a physician’s decision-making skills by adjusting the parameters that
model its decision behaviors. That is, every time the physician makes a decision, the agent
would compare its own decision with the physician’s decision and accordingly adjust it
parameters using a learning algorithm. When the agent’s decision-making skills are close
enough to the physician’s decision-making skills, the physician would be confident to let the
agent substitute him/her for making decisions. These assumptions led us to use the same 200
RPD models representing 200 physicians as 200 ADRMonitor agents (the random human
error component was removed as the agent was a computer program that would not make
such a mistake). These 200 agents were utilized when studying the first and third questions
mentioned earlier. For the second question, different agents were necessary because we
needed different groups of agents, each of which contained 200 agents with the same level
of decision-making skills. We realized this goal by choosing those RPD models whose
Kappa statistics were the same with respect to the optimized RPD model.
E. Simulation Settings
We compared the performance of the 200 simulated physicians with that of the 200
simulated ADRMonitor agents (there were multiple groups of them) in assessing the
strength of the signal pairs between cisapride and Torsades de Pointe, and/or syncope. The
decisions made by the simulated physicians and the simulated ADRMonitor agents were
compared with those of the optimized RPD model, which was the gold standard (recall that

IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 13

this optimized model extracted and represented the consensus of two experienced
physicians).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

During the simulation, the simulated patient cases were randomly retrieved one by one from
the database. The simulated physicians as well as the simulated ADRMonitor agents were
randomly assigned with the cases. A simulated physician or agent could be selected by
chance for more than one time for different patient cases. This implies that some simulated
physicians or agents would never be picked up due to the randomness. The simulated
physician first checked whether a drug–ADR pair of interest existed in the patient case. If it
exist, the physician then assessed the strength of association of that pair. A randomly
selected ADRMonitor agent then performed the same task on the case. Regardless which of
the three issues raised in Section I was studied, all the signal strengths determined by the
agents would always be used (i.e., 100% reporting rate). On the other hand, whether the
assessment generated by a physician would be included depended on reporting rate that we
set.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To study the first issue, we set the simulated physicians’ reporting rate at various levels
between 1% and 10% in order to investigate how the reporting rates affect the ability of
detecting ADR signal pairs (keep in mind that 10% is at the high end of spontaneous
reporting rates estimated in the literature). When the rate was set at, say 10%, it means that
the signal strengths of 90% patient cases were randomly ignored by the simulated physicians
for reporting. To explore the second issue, we created seven groups of 200 ADRMonitor
agents, using the RPD models with seven Kappa statistics levels from 0.4 to 1 with
increment of 0.1. As stated in aforementioned Section III-C, while the agents with the Kappa
statistic value of 1 have excellent decision-making skills, and the agents with the value of
0.4 have poor decision-making skills compared with the gold standard (the optimized RPD
model). To address the last question, the same 200 simulated ADRMonitor agents with
different decision-making skills created previously were used. Four additional patient pools
in different sizes were created. The sizes were proportional to the number of physician
groups that were assumed to work together. For example, one patient pool was for the
situation when ten physician groups was supposed to work together, which is 10% of the
100 physician groups assumed in the study of the first two issues aforementioned. Then only
10% of the patients was selected to the pool.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The ADRMonitor system and the spontaneous reporting approach were compared in terms
of ADR detection rate, false positive rate, and false negative rate. Because of the random
nature of selecting a simulated physician or an ADRMonitor agent, we ran each simulation
experiment ten times and used the averages as results. The simulations were implemented
using the Java programming language. In addition, several existing Java packages (e.g.,
fuzzyjess [40]) were utilized in order to handle fuzzy logic. The implementation of the
genetic algorithm was based on a Java open-source package [42]. We expanded the package
to meet some specific requirements of our simulations.

IV. Simulation Results
Fig. 4 shows the comparison of the total numbers of accumulated potential ADR signal
pairs, including false positive ADR signal pairs, as detected by the simulated ADRMonitor
system and the spontaneous reporting approach with 10% reporting rate between 1993 and
2000. It is for the study of the first question mentioned in Section I. According to the figure,
no potential ADR signal pairs were detected during the first 26 months after the drug
became available because only a small number of patients had taken the drug. Owing to the
100% reporting rate, the ADRMonitor was able to detect many more potential ADR signal
pairs than the current spontaneous reporting strategy could do best (i.e., at the highest

IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

reporting rate in practice). Fig. 5 gives the comparison of the accumulated true ADR signal
pairs (by our definition given earlier) detected by the optimized RPD model (gold standard),
the ADRMonitor, and the spontaneous reporting. It reveals that 20.6 out of 27 ADR signal
pairs were detected by the ADRMonitor, leading to a detection rate of 76.3%. In contrast,
only 2.9 out of the 27 pairs were detected by the spontaneous reporting approach, resulting
in a detection rate of merely 10.7%. That is, the number of true ADR signal pairs detected
by the ADRMonitor was 6.6 times higher than that by the spontaneous reporting strategy.
Obviously, the ADR signal pairs could be detected earlier using the multiagent system
approach.
Table II presents the detailed detection performance of the 200 simulated physicians under
different reporting rates from 1% to 10%. It shows how the increase of reporting rate affects
the detection performance. For example, if the reporting rate increases from 3% to 7%, the
detection rate will increase from 1.5% to 4.8%. This suggests that ADR signal pairs could be
detected earlier by human experts with the help of the ADRMonitor system if the experts
would take advantages of the ADRMonitor (e.g., intelligence, proactivity, and real-time
surveillance) and file more spontaneous reports.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Now, let us examine the simulation results concerning the second issue. Table III lists the
detailed detection performance when 200 simulated ADRMonitor agents with same Kappa
statistics were used to evaluate the simulated patient cases. The experiment was repeated
under the seven different levels of Kappa statistics. Note that the agents with lower Kappa
statistics have worse decision-making skills as compared with the optimized RPD model
(the gold standard). The table shows that the detection rate rises, and at the same time the
false positive rate and false negative rate decrease when the Kappa statistics level increases.
Comparing Table II with Table III, one sees that even if agents’ Kappa statistic is only 0.4,
its detection rate (64.4%) is still much higher than the 200 physicians with 10% reporting
rate can achieve (10.7%). That is, the ADR detection rate of the ADRMonitor agents with
even moderate decision-making skills was five times higher than that of spontaneous
reporting. Understandably, the false positive rate (61.3%) and false negative rate (21.3%) of
the ADRMonitor are somewhat worse than the respective 46.3% and 16.7% of the simulated
physicians. A logical conclusion is that even when the ADRMonitor’s individual agents’
decision-making skill is moderate only, their collective ability in identifying potential ADR
signal pairs can still be better than the spontaneous reporting strategy. The underlying reason
for the advantage is the equivalent 100% reporting rate of the ADRMonitor agents.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The simulation results covering the third issue are depicted in Fig. 6, where it shows the
accumulated average true ADR signal pairs detected when different numbers of physician
groups are supposedly linked via the computer networks by the ADRMonitor system. As
expected, the more the physician groups are connected, the earlier the ADR signal pairs are
detected. The value of Fig. 6 is that it quantifies this expectation. For instance, suppose that
to make a decision on a drug (e.g., withdrawal or assignment of a black box warning), at
least five true ADRs would need to be detected. Then, not enough evidence could be
collected for making the decision in the time period of interest if only ten physician groups
are connected. However, if 30 groups would work together, sufficient information for the
decision would be collected 65 months after the drug is used. If 70 groups collaborate
instead, a decision would be reached 15 months earlier.

V. Conclusion
We have developed a collaborative, team-agent framework that aims to help safety experts
in the FDA and healthcare professionals in healthcare systems to achieve better
postmarketing surveillance and earlier detection of potential ADRs. In this framework, a

IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

group of collaborative agents would effectively search and track relevant patient
information, provide alerts on significant or unexpected adverse reactions, and interact with
drug safety experts (e.g., drug safety evaluators). Using the fuzzy logic-based computational
RPD model, emulating different decision-making skills of physicians and ADRMonitor
agents, our simulation study explored the system’s detection performances. Our quantitative
simulation results show that 1) the agent framework has the potential to identify possible
ADR signal pairs more effectively than the current spontaneous reporting approach; 2) even
intelligent agents with moderate decision-making skills can collectively detect more ADR
signal pairs and accelerate the reporting process because their reporting rate approaches
always 100%; and 3) the more physicians that are linked with and use the ADRMonitor, the
earlier the pertinent ADR signal pairs can be detected. Although a particular drug (i.e.,
cisapride) is used, our approach is generally applicable to detection of the ADR signal pairs
caused by any other drugs. This is because the cues (e.g., temporal association, rechallenge,
and dechallenge) are universal in detecting ADR signals regardless of drugs. Having
established the advantages of ADRMonitor over the spontaneous reporting approach
quantitatively, we are now in the early stage of implementing ADRMonitor in a clinical
setting. We will continue to use the knowledge-based approach (e.g., the fuzzy RPD model
and the fuzzy expert system technique) to detect ADR signal pairs. The advantages of our
approach over other AI approaches (e.g., neural networks) include: 1) explicit and effective
utilization of expert knowledge in the form of if-then rules; and 2) the reasoning chain
between the cause and the effect is always available for human to examine and understand.
Issues that cannot be properly investigated in simulation are being addressed. They include
design of adequate graphical user interface, improvement of ADR detection rate, and
minimization of the false positive detection rate. The overall goal is to enhance the system’s
clinical utility to ensure end user acceptance. We will report the results when they become
available in our future publications.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Dr. J. Ager for his help in statistics and E. Floyd, J. Small, C. Grace, and R.
Johnson for their help in retrieving the patient information.
This work was supported in part by the National Institutes of Health under Grant 1 R21 GM082821-01A1.

Biographies

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Yanqing Ji received the B.Eng. degree in industrial automation from Qingdao University,
Qingdao, China, in 1997, the M.Sc. degree in physical electronics from the University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in 2001, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
engineering from Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, in 2007.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Gonzaga University, Spokane, WA. His research interests include multiagent
systems, parallel and distributed systems, data mining, and their biomedical applications.

IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Dr. Ji is a member of the Program Committees of various international conferences and
workshops including the 2009 International Workshop on Graphics Processing Unit
Technologies and Applications, and reviewer for various international journals.

Hao Ying (S’88–M’90–SM’97) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering, the M.S.
degree in computer engineering from Donghua University, Shanghai, China, in 1982 and
1984, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from The University of
Alabama, Birmingham, in 1990.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

He is currently a Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, where he is a Full Member with the Barbara Ann
Karmanos Cancer Institute. During 1992–2000, he was the Faculty of The University of
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston. During 1998–2000, he was an Adjunct Associate
Professor of the Biomedical Engineering Program, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin. He has authored or coauthored one research monograph/advanced textbook entitled
Fuzzy Control and Modeling: Analytical Foundations and Applications (IEEE Press, 2000),
92 peer-reviewed journal papers, and more than 120 conference papers. He was invited to
serve as a Reviewer for more than 60 international journals.
Prof. Ying is an Associate Editor or a member of Editorial Board for nine international
journals. He is a member of the Fuzzy Systems Technical Committee of the IEEE
Computational Intelligence Society and chairs its Task Force on Competitions. He is an
Elected Board Member of the North American Fuzzy Information Processing Society
(NAFIPS). He was a Program Chair for The 2005 NAFIPS Conference as well as for The
International Joint Conference of NAFIPS Conference, the Industrial Fuzzy Control and
Intelligent System Conference, and the NASA Joint Technology Workshop on Neural
Networks and Fuzzy Logic, in 1994. He was a Publication Chair for the 2000 IEEE
International Conference on Fuzzy Systems and was a member of Program Committee for
more than 35 international conferences.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Margo S. Farber, photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.
John Yen, photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.
Peter Dews, photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.
Richard E. Miller, photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.
R. Michael Massanari, photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.

References
[1]. Kohn, LT.; Corrigan, JM.; Donaldson, MS. To Error is Human: Building a Safer Health System.
National Academy Press; Washington, DC: 1999.

IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

[2]. Lasser KE, Allen PD, Woolhandler SJ, Himmelstein DU, Wolfe SM, Bor DH. Timing of new
black box warnings and withdrawals for prescription medications. J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 2002;
287:2215–2220.
[3]. Talbot, J.; Waller, P. Stephens’ Detection of New Adverse Drug Reactions. 5th ed. Wiley; New
York: 2004.
[4]. Klein DF. The flawed basis for FDA post-marketing safety decisions: The example of antidepressants and children. Neuropsychopharmacology. Apr.2006 31:689–99. [PubMed:
16395296]
[5]. Hartmann K, Doser AK, Kuhn M. Postmarketing safety information: How useful are spontaneous
reports? Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Safety. Apr.1999 8:65–71.
[6]. Hazell L, Shakir SAW. Under-reporting of adverse drug reactions—A systematic review. Drug
Safety. 2006; 29:385–396. [PubMed: 16689555]
[7]. Granas AG, Buajordet M, Stenberg-Nilsen H, Harg P, Horn AM. Pharmacists’ attitudes towards
the reporting of suspected adverse drug reactions in Norway. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Safety.
Apr.2007 16:429, 34.
[8]. Goldman SA. Limitations and strengths of spontaneous reports data. Clin. Ther. 1998; 20:C40–
C44. [PubMed: 9915089]
[9]. Biriell C, Edwards R. Reasons for reporting adverse drug reactions—Some thoughts based on an
international review. Pharmacol. Drug Safety. 1997; 6:21–26.
[10]. Bennett CL, Nebeker JR, Yarnold PR, Tigue CC, Dorr DA, McKoy JM, Edwards BJ, Hurdle JF,
West DP, Lau DT, Angelotta C, Weitzman SA, Belknap SM, Djulbegovic B, Tallman MS, Kuzel
TM, Benson AB, Evens A, Trifilio SM, Courtney DM, Raisch DW. Evaluation of serious
adverse drug reactions: A proactive pharmacovigilance program (RADAR) vs safety activities
conducted by the food and drug administration and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Arch. Intern.
Med. May 28.2007 167:1041–1049. [PubMed: 17533207]
[11]. Szarfman A, Tonning JM, Doraiswamy PM. Pharmacovigilance in the 21st century: New
systematic tools for an old problem. Pharmacotherapy. Sep.2004 24:1099–104. [PubMed:
15460169]
[12]. Lindquist M, Edwards IR, Bate A, Fucik H, Nunes AM, Stahl M. From association to alert—A
revised approach to international signal analysis. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Safety. 1999; 1:15–
25.
[13]. Evans SJ, Waller PC, Davis S. Use of proportional reporting ratios (PRRs) for signal generation
from spontaneous adverse drug reaction reports. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Safety. Oct-Nov;
2001 10:483–486.
[14]. DuMouchel W. Bayesian data mining in large frequency tables, with an application to the FDA
spontaneous reporting system. Amer. Stat. 1999; 53:177–190.
[15]. Purcell P, Barty S. Statistical techniques for signal generation: The Australian experience. Drug
Safety. 2002; 25:415–421. [PubMed: 12071778]
[16]. Heeley E, Wilton LV, Shakir SA. Automated signal generation in prescription-event monitoring.
Drug Safety. 2002; 25:423–432. [PubMed: 12071779]
[17]. Kubota K, Koide D, Hirai T. Comparison of data mining methodologies using Japanese
spontaneous reports. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Safety. Jun.2004 13:387–394.
[18]. Hauben M. Early postmarketing drug safety surveillance: Data mining points to consider. Ann.
Pharmacother. Oct.2004 38:1625–1630. [PubMed: 15304626]
[19]. Hauben M, Zhou X. Quantitative methods in pharmacovigilance: Focus on signal detection. Drug
Safety. 2003; 26:159–186. [PubMed: 12580646]
[20]. Ferber, J. Multi-Agent Systems: An Introduction to Distributed Artificial Intelligence. AddisonWesley; New York: 1999.
[21]. Jennings NR. On agent-based software engineering. Artif. Intell. 2000; 117:277–296.
[22]. Parunak, HVD. Applications of distributed artificial intelligence in industry. In: O’Hare, G.;
Jennings, N., editors. Foundations of Distributed Artificial Intelligence. Wiley; New York: 1996.
p. 139-164.
[23]. Yen J, Fan X, Sun S, Hanratty T, Dumer J. Agents with shared mental models for enhancing
team decision makings. J. Decis. Support Syst. 2006; 41:634–653.
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

[24]. Huang J, Jennings NR, Fox J. Int. J. Appl. Artif. Intell. 1995; 9:401–420.
[25]. Vazquez-Salceda J, Padget JA, Cortes U, Lopez-Navidad A, Caballero F. Formalizing an
electronic institution for the distribution of human tissues. Artif. Intell. Med. Mar.2003 27:233–
58. [PubMed: 12667738]
[26]. Alsinet T, Ansotegui C, Bejar R, Fernandez C, Manya F. Automated monitoring of medical
protocols: A secure and distributed architecture. Artif. Intell. Med. Mar.2003 27:367–92.
[PubMed: 12667743]
[27]. Bates DW, Evans RS, Murff H, Stetson PD, Pizziferri L, Hripcsak G. Detecting adverse events
using information technology. J. Amer. Med. Inf. Assoc. Mar-Apr;2003 10:115–28.
[28]. Ji, Y.; Ying, H.; Yen, J.; Fan, X.; Massanari, RM.; Barth-Jones, DC. Team-based multi-agent
system for early detection of adverse drug reactions in postmarketing surveillance; Proc. 24th
North Amer. Fuzzy Inf. Process. Soc.; Ann Arbor, MI. 2005; p. 644-649.
[29]. Ji Y, Ying H, Yen J, Zhu S, Barth-Jones DC, Miller RE, Massanari RM. A distributed adverse
drug reaction detection system using intelligent agents with fuzzy recognition-primed decision
model. Int. J. Intell. Syst. 2007; 22:827–845.
[30]. TILAB (Telecom Italia Lab). Java Agent DEvelopment Framework (JADE). TILAB; Torino,
Italy: Jul.. 2004 Available: http://jade.tilab.com/
[31]. Janis, IL.; Mann, L. Decision Making: A Psychological Analysis of Conflict, Choice, and
Commitment. Free Press; New York: 1977.
[32]. Klein, GA. Decision Making In Action: Models and Methods. Ablex Publishing; Norwood, NJ:
1993. A recognition-primed decision making model of rapid decision making; p. 138-147.
[33]. Klein GA. Strategies of decision making. Military Rev. 1989; 69:56–64.
[34]. Kaempf GL, Klein G, Thorsden ML, Wolf S. Decision making in complex naval command-andcontrol environments. Human Factors. 1996; 38:220–231.
[35]. Ji Y, Massanari RM, Ager J, Yen J, Miller RE, Ying H. A fuzzy logic-based computational
recognition-primed decision model. Inf. Sci. 2007; 177:4338–4353.
[36]. Zadeh LA. Fuzzy sets. Inf. Control. 1965; 8:338–353.
[37]. Ying, H. Fuzzy Control and Modeling: Analytical Foundations and Applications. IEEE Press;
Piscataway, NJ: 2000.
[38]. Ji Y, Ying H, Yen J, Massanari RM. A fuzzy logic-based computational recognition-primed
decision model. Inf. Sci. 2007; 177:4338–4353.
[39]. Edwards IR, Aronson JK. Adverse drug reactions: Definitions, diagnosis, and management.
Lancet. Oct.2000 356:1255–1259. [PubMed: 11072960]
[40]. Orchard, R. Fuzzy reasoning in jess: The FuzzyJ toolkit and fuzzyjess; Proc. 3rd Int. Conf.
Enterprise Inf. Syst.; Setubal, Portugal. 2001; p. 533-542.
[41]. Landis JR, Koch GG. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics.
Mar.1977 33:159–174. [PubMed: 843571]
[42]. Faupel, M. GAJIT—Genetic Algorithm Java Implementation Toolkit. 2003. Available: http://
www.micropraxis.com/gajit/index.html

IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 1.

Overall structure of the ADRMonitor.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 2.

ADRMonitor architecture at the healthcare system level.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 3.

Sample experience.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 4.

Accumulated average potential ADR signal pairs detected by the ADRMonitor and by the
spontaneous reporting approach (month 1 and month 85 correspond to Jul. 1993 and Jul.
2000, respectively—the time period that the drug cisapride was on the market).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 5.

Accumulated average “true” cisapride ADR signal pairs detected by the optimized RPD
model (gold standard), the ADRMonitor, and the spontaneous reporting approach (the x-axis
is the same as that in Fig. 4).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 6.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Accumulated average true cisapride ADR signal pairs detected by the ADRMonitor under
different numbers of connected physician groups (the x-axis is the same as that in Fig. 4).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 25

TABLE I

Relating Cures to Degree of Causality of a Signal Pair—Four Examples

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cues

Cue value
set 1

Cue value
set 2

Cue value
set 3

Cue value
set 4

Temporal
association

Likely

Likely

Possible

Unlikely

Other
explanations

No

No

No

Yes

Dechallenge

Likely

Likely

Possible

Unlikely

Rechallenge

Likely

Possible

Unlikely

Unlikely

Degree of
causality

Very likely

Probable

Possible

Unlikely

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 26

TABLE II

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Averaged Results of ADR Signal Pairs Detected by the 200 Simulated Physicians Under Different Reporting
Rates (The Total Number of True ADR Signal Pairs is 27)

Reporting
rate

Average
Detected
Potential
ADR
Signal
Pairs

Average
Detected
True
ADR
Signal
Pairs

Average
Detection
Rate

Average
False
Positive
(Rate)

Average
False
Negative
(Rate)

1%

0.3

0.1

0.4%

0.2
(66.7%)

0.1
(33.3%)

3%

0.9

0.4

1.5%

0.5
(55.6%)

0.3
(33.3%)

5%

1.9

0.8

3.0%

1.1
(57.9%)

0.4
(21.1%)

7%

2.8

1.3

4.8%

1.5
(53.6%)

0.6
(21.4%)

10%

5.4

2.9

10.7%

2.5
(46.3%)

0.9
(16.7%)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

Ji et al.

Page 27

TABLE III

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Averaged Results of ADR Signal Pairs Detected by Different Groups of 200 Simulated Agents With the Same
Kappa Statistics (The Total Number of True ADR Signal Pairs is 27)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Kappa
statistic

Average
Detected
Potential
ADR
Signal
Pairs

Average
Detected
True ADR
Signal
Pairs

Average
Detection
Rate

Average
False
Positive
(Rate)

Average
False
Negative
(Rate)

0.4

45

17.4

64.4%

27.6
(61.3%)

9.6
(21.3%)

0.5

42

18.3

67.8%

23.7
(56.4%)

8.7
(20.7%)

0.6

37.9

19.9

73.7%

18
(47.5%)

7.1
(18.7%)

0.7

37.6

21.8

80.7%

15.8
(42.0%)

5.2
(13.8%)

0.8

35.8

22.6

83.7%

13.2
(36.9%)

4.4
(12.3%)

0.9

32.8

24

88.9%

8.8
(26.8%)

3.0
(9.1%)

1.0

28.2

26.6

98.7%

1.6
(5.7%)

0.4
(1.4%)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 February 10.

