DIA

Biostatistics: Original Research

An Alternative to Disproportionality:
A Frequency-Based Method for
Pharmacovigilance Data Mining

Therapeutic Innovation
& Regulatory Science
2018, Vol. 52(3) 294-299
ª The Author(s) 2017
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/2168479017728986
tirs.sagepub.com

Jeremy D. Jokinen, PhD1, Fabio Lievano, MD1, Linda Scarazzini, MD1,
and Melissa Truffa, RPh1

Abstract
Background: Safety surveillance relies on mining of large pharmacovigilance (PV) databases to generate insights regarding the safe
use of pharmaceutical products. The predominant approach to PV data mining involves computation of disproportionality scores
for drug–adverse event (drug-AE) pairs. However, this approach requires a database to be sufficiently large, sufficiently diverse for
the analysis to be reliably sensitive and specific, and fails to consider the particular safety profile of a product. Objective: The
present study proposes and tests a novel, frequency-based approach to PV data mining that (1) leverages product knowledge and
historical drug-AE trends and (2) imposes no requirement for the size and diversity of the database to which it is applied. Method:
A focus group of physicians and scientists was convened to identify quantitative characteristics of data trends that they consider
informative when reviewing counts of adverse events for products under surveillance. Feedback was transferred into a series of
decision rules that, when applied to adverse event counts, identifies adverse event trends that are classified as Continuing Trend,
Emerging Trend, or No Trend. Regression analyses are completed to verify the presence of a linear trend; and categorical
measures of association completed to compare this frequency-based approach to disproportionality scores in a simulated
database. Results: A significant, positive linear trend is present for the Continuing Trend and Emerging Trend categories
(P < .0001). There is a significant association between trend categorizations and disproportionality scores (P < .0001). Conclusion:
The proposed alternative frequency-based method for PV data mining would be useful where disproportionalities scores are not
appropriate. Additionally, this method may be useful in conjunction with disproportionality scores, where appropriate, highlighting adverse events that are both reported disproportionately and have increasing trends.
Keywords
pharmacovigilance, data mining, signal detection, safety statistics, disproportionality

Introduction
Data mining of longitudinal databases is an analytical task common to disciplines as diverse as public health; engineering; and
the biological, political, and social sciences.1 Within the field of
pharmacovigilance (PV), mining of spontaneously reported
adverse event databases is a key source of on-market information
regarding the safety of medicinal products.2 Databases with continually accumulating adverse event information are maintained
by pharmaceutical companies and regulatory authorities globally.
These databases serve as valuable resources to ensure public
health; however, the volume of information contained therein can
make meaningful use of these data challenging.3 As a result,
methods for mining these databases have been a topic of regulatory, academic, and industry research for over 20 years.4-6
The most common approach to mining PV databases is the
use of disproportionality measures.6,7 Disproportionality measures refer to a group of statistical methods that compare the
proportion of occurrences of a target adverse event for a given
drug (foreground) to the proportion of occurrences of the same

adverse event for all other drugs in the database (background).
In effect, the background proportion serves as the “expected
value” against which the foreground proportion is compared.
The computational specifics for disproportionality measures,
such as PRR, EBGM, ROR, etc. have been described in numerous publications.8-10 If the foreground is substantially greater
than the expected, background, proportion, the disproportionality measure is substantially greater than, 1.0 indicating disproportionate reporting for the drug-AE pair. Whether the
disproportionality is considered a potential safety concern
requiring further investigation depends upon the medical and

1

Abbvie, Inc, North Chicago, IL, USA

Submitted 15-Feb-2017; accepted 7-Aug-2017
Corresponding Author:
Jeremy Jokinen, PhD, Abbvie, Inc, GM60, AP51-2, 1 N Waukegan Rd,
North Chicago, IL 60064-1802, USA.
Email: jeremy.jokinen@abbvie.com

Jokinen et al
safety expertise being applied to the review of the data and the
a priori threshold for determining if a disproportionality value
is extreme enough to be considered a signal of disproportionate
reporting (SDR).
A major concern regarding disproportionality measures is the
appropriateness of the comparison of the foreground proportion
to the background proportion. One needs to consider if the drugAE in the foreground is reasonable to compare to the background drugs and adverse events. It is generally believed that
disproportionality measures are acceptable data mining analyses
if the database is suitably large and suitably diverse.8,9 If so, the
background proportion can be considered an estimate of the
occurrence of this AE in the general population, and therefore
the foreground is a comparison to an estimate of the proportion
experiencing an AE in the general population. This requirement
for size and diversity may be met with large regulatory databases, such as FDA FAERS or WHO VigiBase, but it is unlikely
to be met with data contained in a company-owned, proprietary,
safety database. A company-owned database likely contains data
for a limited number of products intended to treat patients from a
limited subset of therapeutic areas, which can cause disproportionality measures to produce unpredictable results (J. D. Jokinen and M. Henderson, unpublished data, 2016). For example, a
consumer product safety database might contain a large amount
of safety data for an over-the-counter pain medication, but the
background in this database might be composed of allergy medications, cosmetics, or topical sunscreens. The potential SDR for
the pain reliever is dependent upon sunscreen safety reports and
allergies and, more generally, dependent upon seasonal fluctuations in reporting of these background products and events. In
these databases, one needs to carefully consider whether it is
reasonable to compare foreground to background using disproportionality measures.
The present study proposes a data mining algorithm that is
not dependent upon this foreground-to-background comparison. The approach results in an algorithm based on the frequency of reports over time and leverages insights from the
medical and scientific subject matter experts (SMEs). In this
frequency-based approach, the comparison is not foreground to
background proportion, but rather the count of adverse events
for a product in the current time period relative to previous time
periods. A focus group of medical and scientific safety experts
were convened to identify quantitative characteristics that are
of potential clinical significance when reviewing safety data.
The decision was made to focus on quantitative aspects, for
example, changes in the frequency of adverse event reports, as
opposed to qualitative aspects, such as adverse event seriousness or source of adverse event report. Some authors have
suggested that quantitative and qualitative aspects play complementary roles in safety surveillance. 11 Therefore, we
approached these topics independently in order to provide flexibility in combining quantitative and qualitative aspects across
the entire surveillance ecosystem in the future.
The following describes our approach to build a judgmentbased algorithmic approach, a sieve analysis, against which

295
data from a spontaneous report database are evaluated.
Research exists demonstrating the value of statistical
approaches that prioritize potential signals for further evaluation of medical SMEs.12,13 Our approach is to extend this thinking by making the prioritization criteria the analysis itself, by
translating SME judgment into a series of filters, which results
in a hierarchy of data for review. This analysis is similar to the
geological practice of applying sieves to separate finer and
finer layers of rock and soil.14 The process, criteria for prioritization, and results when applied to a simulated subset of data
are reviewed. Finally, the correspondence between this
approach and proportional reporting ratios (PRRs), a standard
disproportionality approach, is examined.

Method
Gather SME Input
Safety physicians and scientists for a major pharmaceutical
company were engaged in a focus group regarding data they
review periodically to ensure patient safety. The focus group
was conducted by a doctoral-level psychologist with experience conducting qualitative data-collection interviews. The
intention of the focus group is to identify characteristics within
data that are significant to this group of SMEs and may potentially indicate a safety signal. Feedback was recorded as verbatim text, common themes were identified and summarized.
For example, SMEs routinely removed from consideration any
adverse events that have 0 reports for the current period of
evaluation. This may seem self-evident, but it is not uncommon
for a disproportionality analysis to flag for further review
adverse events with no new information for the current evaluation period. Additionally, SMEs regard adverse events in the
current period of evaluation as more informative or interesting
if the number of events for the current quarter is large relative
to the cumulative number of reports for a given adverse event.
That is, the current data represent a large proportion of all data
in the database for a given adverse event. Finally, if this reporting period included data for an adverse event that had not been
reviewed previously, that adverse event would be interesting to
review. From this discussion, the filters for the sieve analysis
were developed and programmed to sort data into a series of
priority levels. The filters were chosen such that the criteria are
increasingly restrictive and only the most significant “must
see” data flow to the far end of the sieve requiring priority
review. For example, the requirement that there be at least one
report in this reporting period is least restrictive, and many PTs
meet this requirement, but the first time a PT has been observed
for this drug is most restrictive, very few PTs meet this requirement, and it results in the highest priority.

Transferring SME Input to Data Filters—Sieve Analysis
Feedback from SMEs was translated by data scientists into a
sequence of data filters. The data filters are specifically
designed to (1) closely approximate the verbal descriptors

296

Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science 52(3)

Figure 1. Prioritization according to the sieve analysis decision tree.

provided by the SMEs and (2) be ordered relative to the
“importance” or “informativeness” of the data to the SMEs.
In the present example, as data proceed from the top filters
(Priority 7) to the bottom of the sieve (Priority 1), the drugAE pair data are more likely to be of interest to the SME
reviewers responsible for product safety as the data are more
likely to represent an upward trend. Priority is assigned to the
data according to the number of filters in the sieve that data
points flow through. Figure 1 shows the resulting sieve to be
applied to the adverse event data.
The decision points in the sieve analysis cover a variety of
quantitative aspects of the data that medical SMEs have identified as being of keen interest. For example, the criterion
“NCQ >25% of the cumulative total for this drug-AE” is
intended to prioritize trends in data for drug-AE combinations
where little historical data exist. If the number of reports in this
quarter comprises more than 25% of the historical total in the
database, this is a drug-AE combination for which a substantial
proportion of the reporting has occurred in the recent time
frame and therefore receives a higher prioritization. Twentyfive percent was selected arbitrarily based on discussion with
the SMEs regarding how they would quantify the amount of
evidence this quarter relative to the total ever collected that
would “catch their attention.” Similarly, if the current quarter
is the first time this drug-AE combination has appeared in the
data, the criterion “NCQ¼Cumulative total reports for this
drug-AE” results in a priority of 1 assigned to this pair. This
filter was assigned the highest priority as all SMEs agreed that
they would want to see the first report of an AE, even if ultimately the case was considered uninformative. Additionally,
frequency analyses like those carried out in the current study
might identify trends associated with increased volume of drug
sales and patient exposure, rather than increasing drug-AE
trends. Therefore, priority filters requiring a frequency greater
than the average for the last year and greater than the maximum

for the last 4 quarters are intended to prioritize drug-AE combinations that are increasing relative to any underlying increasing trend. The result of this analysis is fewer and fewer data
points assigned to each subsequent priority level. Additionally,
the relevance of those data points to the decision task—determination of an upward trend within the spontaneous report
database—increases.
Following calculation of the 7 possible priority scores for
each drug-AE pair for the current time period and the previous
time period, the priorities are compared and the number of
priorities simplified to aid interpretation of the results and
action to be taken by safety review teams. The result is a
3-category system. The first priority, “Continuing Trend,” contains drug-AE pairs that were scored a priority 1, 2, or 3 for
both the current time period and the previous time period. In
other words, these are drug-AE pairs that had an upward trend
in the previous time period and the current one. “Emerging
Trend” is assigned to drug-adverse pairs that were priority 4,
5, 6, or 7 in the previous time period and priority 1, 2, or 3 for
the current time period. This trend is newly emerging as the
previous time period data indicated little or no trend, but the
current quarter does indicate an upward trend. All other combinations are indicated as “No Trend.”

Data Simulation
A random data set of counts of adverse events from a live,
spontaneous report database was extracted without adverse
event or drug names included. The data set contained 80,000
rows of 8 quarter counts of the number of reports contained in
the database, for a total of 640,000 quarter-count data points.
Bootstrap resampling of these quarter counts was used to create
a simulated database of 2 million rows of 8 quarters of data that
resemble spontaneous report data contained within the original

Jokinen et al

297

Table 1. Percentage of Drug–Adverse Event Pairs by Priority.
Priority

Table 3. Percentage of Each Priority Category that are PRR SDR/
NoSDR.

Percent
Percent

Continuing trend
Emerging trend
No trend

0.53
4.81
94.66

Priority
Continuing trend
Emerging trend
No trend

No SDR

SDR

36.32
81.01
92.44

63.68
18.99
7.56

Table 2. Summary of Linear Regression of Adverse Event Counts on
Time Period.
Priority
Continuing trend
Emerging trend
No trend

Time Trend Parameter Value

P Value

14.58
0.42
0.06

<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

database. Finally, 100 mock drug names and 1000 mock
adverse events were randomly assigned to the data rows.

Results
Descriptive analyses, counts and percentages, were examined
to verify that the 3 priorities resulted in a smaller number of
items for review. If the prioritization scheme failed to identify a
subset for prioritized review, the approach would not be tenable
for a surveillance program with limited resources to review
data. Table 1 summarizes the percentage of the 2 million data
rows that are categorized in each of the 3 priorities.
The prioritization reduced the number of drug-AE pairs for
review to a subset of the original. The substantial majority of all
data points are categorized as No Trend. However, additional
analyses are required to verify that linear trends are present in
the first 2 priority categories and absent in the last.
Linear regression analyses were conducted for each priority
category to examine the extent to which the categorizations
correctly identify an upward trend present in the data. For each
analysis, adverse event counts were regressed on the time
period. Because of the large number of data points, it is anticipated that all parameters would be statistically significant.
Examination of the parameter for the time component provides
information regarding the trend present in the data. Table 2
below summarizes the results of the regression analysis.
The greatest value for the time parameter is in the Continuing
Trend subset. For every 1-unit increase in the time parameter,
there is an average increase of 14.58 adverse events. For the No
Trend subset, the time parameter is nearly 0. For every 1-unit
increase in time, there is an average increase of 0.06 adverse
events. The Emerging Trend results are between the 2 extremes.
In order to provide additional context for this novel analytics
approach, the data were also analyzed using the typical PRR
approach. Signals of disproportionate reporting (SDR) were
identified using Evan’s criteria.15 PRR resulting in SDR were
compared to the 3 priority categories to examine the correspondence between the sieve, frequency-based analysis, and

disproportionality measures for each drug-AE pair. Table 3
summarizes the percentage of data in each category.
Table 3 demonstrates a strong correspondence between the
trend categories of the sieve analysis and signals of disproportionate reporting as identified by PRR. Of the drug-AE pairs
considered Continuing Trend, 63.68% were also identified as
a signal of disproportionate reporting. Of the No Trend drugAE pairs, only 7.56% were identified as signals of disproportionate reporting. Results of the Cochran-Armitage trend test
are consistent with the observations of the percentage scores.
The Cochran-Armitage trend test is significant (Z ¼ 97.18,
P < .0001), indicating a statistically significant association
between the priority categories and the SDR/No SDR disproportionality results.

Conclusion and Discussion
Initial development of the frequency-based sieve analysis is
promising. Results indicate that a small proportion of drugAE pairs in large simulated databases is prioritized for review.
Additionally, those that were prioritized demonstrated a significant, upward time trend in adverse event counts. Finally, the
results of the prioritization are positively correlated with the
results of the well-established PRR method for identifying signals of disproportionate reporting.
The sieve analysis methodology offered many additional
benefits. First, the algorithm is easily implemented with minimal statistical and data science knowledge. Second, the results
do not depend upon assumptions regarding the size and diversity of the database being analyzed. Finally, the authors found
the process of working with medical and scientific SMEs to
generate levels of the sieve analysis promoted necessary discussions regarding outcomes and characteristics of data that
were of greatest interest. This discussion facilitated both the
initial development and future refinements to the algorithm that
are necessary for ongoing monitoring of spontaneous report
data.16 Refinements may include incorporating both quantitative and qualitative algorithms, which Caster et al have argued
may improve overall signal detection.11 Inclusion of qualitative
measures may improve the positive predictive value of data
mining efforts, and this statistical/medical SME collaboration
may result in a more robust PV system overall.
This sieve analysis is a frequency-based approach to data
mining. As such, the analysis is impacted by all factors that
impact reporting frequency of adverse events to spontaneous

298
report databases. Factors such as product sales and stimulated
reporting due to new product launches or other publicity
effects can result in upward trends in spontaneous reports of
adverse events. These upward trends might be signaled by
frequency analyses as high-priority drug-AE pairs that should
be evaluated as safety signals. It is possible that a combination
of frequency-based analyses and other methods, such as disproportionality measures, could reduce false positives that
may result from stimulated reporting. Future research should
investigate the potential value of signals of disproportionality
that also show increasing trends as identified by frequencybased methods.
Alternatives to this sieve approach, such as disproportionality measures for data mining, are successfully applied but
should be interpreted with caution. Interpretation of disproportionality measures requires consideration of four major components: the disproportionality measure itself, the threshold for
determination of a signal of disproportionate reporting, the
foreground proportion, and the background proportion. In a
form of denominator neglect, often the background is not thoroughly considered in the interpretation of disproportionalities.17 SDR could result from changes in the foreground
proportion, but could also result from changes in the background proportion. Changes in the background are not obvious
in disproportionality measures and require careful consideration of the data overall. The sieve analysis approach, however,
relies only on the time course of a specific adverse event for a
given drug and not the background reporting of the adverse
event of interest for other drugs.
A reasonable criticism of the sieve approach is a criticism
common to all data mining efforts applied to spontaneous
report databases—the sieve analysis will never eliminate the
need for SME review in judgments of safety and benefit risk. It
is important to remember that frequency-based analyses, and
PV data mining in general, are statistical approaches to what is
inherently a medical question: Is there a safety issue present in
the data? Ultimately, human expertise is required to review
complex issues such as potential drug interactions or the biological plausibility of adverse events for a particular drug.
However, the sieve analysis provides a prioritization that can
triage the most critical data and allow experts to budget time
and resources accordingly.12,13
The proposed method for frequency-based data mining may
play an important role in a company’s safety surveillance ecosystem. The analyses presented above demonstrate that the
results are consistent with, but complementary to, traditional
disproportionality measures. These 2 approaches combined
may yield useful information regarding adverse events that are
being reported both disproportionately and with increasing frequency. Additionally, augmenting these quantitative
approaches with a qualitative approach such as the vigiRank
approach may start to create an algorithmic approach that more
closely aligns with human judgment which integrates both the
quantitative and the qualitative aspects of a signal.11,18

Therapeutic Innovation & Regulatory Science 52(3)
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
All authors are employees of AbbVie, Inc.

Funding
No financial support of the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article was declared.

References
1. Frisén M. Methods and evaluations for surveillance in industry,
business, finance, and public health. Q Reliabil Eng Int. 2011;27:
611-621.
2. Harpaz R, DuMouchel W, LePendu P, Bauer-Mehren A, Ryan P,
Shah NH. Performance of pharmacovigilance signal-detection
algorithms for the FDA adverse event reporting system. Clin
Pharmacol Ther. 2013;93:539-546.
3. Hauben M, Madigan D, Gerrits CM, Walsh L, Van Puijenbroek
EP. The role of data mining in pharmacovigilance. Expert Opin
Drug Saf. 2005;4:929-948.
4. Chan KA, Hauben M. Signal detection in pharmacovigilance:
empirical evaluation of data mining tools. Pharmacoepidemiol
Drug Saf. 2005;14:597-599.
5. Bate A, Evans SJ. Quantitative signal detection using spontaneous
ADR reporting. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2009;18:427-436.
6. Quattrini G, Zambon A, Simoni L, Fiori G. Disproportionality
measures used in signal detection: an assessment on pharmacovigilance adverse event reporting system data. Value Health. 2015;
18:A720.
7. Hauben M, Zhou X. Quantitative methods in pharmacovigilance.
Drug Saf. 2003;26:159-186.
8. Almenoff JS, LaCroix KK, Yuen NA, Fram D, DuMouchel W.
Comparative performance of two quantitative safety signalling
methods: implications for use in a pharmacovigilance department.
Drug Saf. 2006;29:875-887.
9. Hauben M, Zhou X. Quantitative methods in pharmacovigilance:
focus on signal detection. Drug Saf. 2003;26:159-186.
10. Jokinen JD. Determination of change in online monitoring of
longitudinal data: An evaluation of methodologies [dissertation].
Athens, OH: Ohio University; 2015.
11. Caster O, Juhlin K, Watson S, Noren GN. Improved statistical
signal detection in pharmacovigilance by combining multiple
strength-of-evidence aspects in vigiRank. Drug Saf. 2014;37:
617-628.
12. Levitan B, Yee C, Russo L, Bayney R, Thomas A, Klincewicz S.
A model for decision support in signal triage. Drug Saf. 2008;31:
727-735.
13. Stahl M, Lindquist M, Edwards IR, Brown EG. Introducing triage
logic as a new strategy for the detection of signals in the WHO
Drug Monitoring Database. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2004;
13:355-363.
14. McCave I, Syvitski JP. Principles and methods of geological particle size analysis. In: Syvitski JP, ed. Principles, Methods and
Application of Particle Size Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press; 1991:3-21.

Jokinen et al
15. Evans SJ, Waller PC, Davis S. Use of proportional reporting ratios
(PRRs) for signal generation from spontaneous adverse drug reaction reports. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2001;10:483-486.
16. European Medicines Agency. Guideline on good pharmacovigilance practices (GVP) Module IX Addendum I—methodological
aspects of signal detection from spontaneous reports of suspected
adverse reactions 2016. Updated August 4, 2016. http://www.e
ma.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Regulatory_and_

299
procedural_guideline/2016/08/WC500211715.pdf. Accessed
September 22, 2016.
17. Reyna VF, Brainerd CJ. Numeracy, ratio bias, and denominator
neglect in judgments of risk and probability. Learn Indiv Differ.
2008;18:89-107.
18. Bergvall T, Noren GN, Lindquist M. vigiGrade: a tool to identify
well-documented individual case reports and highlight systematic
data quality issues. Drug Saf. 2014;37:65-77.

