ISSN 0146-4116, Automatic Control and Computer Sciences, 2020, Vol. 54, No. 5, pp. 391–402. © Allerton Press, Inc., 2020.

Drug Adverse Reaction Discovery Based on Attention Mechanism
and Fusion of Emotional Information
Keming Kanga, Shengwei Tiana, *, and Long Yub
a

School of Software, Xinjiang University, Urumqi, 830008 China
Key Laboratory of software engineering technology, Xinjiang University Network Center,
Xinjiang University, Urumqi, 830046 China
*e-mail: tianshengwei@163.com

b

Received September 30, 2019; revised February 27, 2020; accepted March 2, 2020

Abstract—This paper proposes a research method of adverse drug reactions based on attention mechanism and fusion of emotional information, and constructs a neural network model, Attention based
Convolutional neural networks and Bi-directional long short-Term Memory (ACB). In order to
improve the recognition efficiency of adverse drug reactions and solve the problems of gradient explosion and disappearance, it introduced the attention mechanism and Bi-directional Long Short-Term
Memory (BiLSTM) to enhance the reliability of the model, as well as mixed together the emotional
information of the users’ medication comments. Compared with the superficial information only
relied on users’ medication reviews, this is able to enhance features’ expression way and the accuracy
of the adverse drug reaction’s classifications. This experiment dataset was based on the local drugs in
Xinjiang. The best performance on a test dataset was with ACB obtaining a precision of 95.12% and a
recall of 98.48%, and an F-score of 96.77%. The results showed that the ACB model can significantly
improve the recognition and classification performance of adverse drug reactions.
Keywords: Attention mechanism, emotional information, adverse reaction recognition and classification, BiLSTM
DOI: 10.3103/S0146411620050053

1. INTRODUCTION
Adverse drug reactions (ADR) are harmful reactions caused by drug quality problems or improper use
of drugs, including side effects, toxic effects (toxic reactions), after effects (post-effects), allergic reactions, and specificities, qualitative reactions, double infections and dependence caused by anti-infective
drugs, and carcinogenic, teratogenic, mutagenic effects, as well as the effects of the drug itself or drug
interactions, which are not related to the purpose of the drug and are not conducive to the patient. At present, adverse drug reactions are becoming the focus of medical research and development departments,
ordinary users and major medical institutions. So the significance of user safety is particularly obvious.
Considering the bottleneck of research on new drugs in medical research and development platforms, it’s
impossible to conduct drug testing and the development of drugs for a large number of people in a short
period of time. Therefore, researches on adverse drug reactions and grasping known and potential drugs’
adverse reactions are of great value to medical research and development.
With the continuous maturity of deep learning technology in recent years, many scholars are using different types of deep learning models to apply to the hot issues in the field of medical research. Leaman [1]
uses sliding window-based dictionary matching to identify adverse drug reactions in drug reviewers. The
experimental results show that social media commentary findings and predictions of adverse drug reactions are feasible. Andrew Yates [2] labeled only 250 drug users' comments for experimental data, and
developed the ADR trace system based on experiments.
Adverse drug reactions are one of the common problems in the medical field. According to statistics,
more than 2 million patients in the United States are hospitalized each year due to adverse drug reactions
and about 100.000 of them are killed because of adverse drug reactions [3]. Leaman [4] said that the economic loss caused by adverse reactions is about 136 billion yuan. In China, the situation of adverse drug
reactions is still grim. Xinjiang local medicine is an important part of China’s medicine. Based on the current research on adverse drug reactions of domestic and foreign workers, relying on Xinjiang local medi391

392

KEMING KANG et al.

cine, and doing deep research on the adverse drug reactions of Xinjiang local medicines can promote the
economic development of Xinjiang and ensure medical safety. Given the incomplete local medicine corpus in Xinjiang, it is necessary to get comments from social media, such as Baidu Post Bar, forums, blogs,
web pages and so on. Users’ medication reviews, however, are filled with issues, like casualness, irregular
expressions, inaccurate words, unclear user expressions, and misspellings and so on, all of which bring
great challenges to the study of adverse drug reactions.
Focusing on the above problems, this paper proposes a neural network model, Attention based Convolutional neural networks and Bi-directional long short-Term Memory (ACB) based on Attention mechanism and fusion of emotion information. The attention mechanism is widely used in entity information,
distance information and pooling. Introducing attention mechanism to generate attention matrix can
reduce the weight of noisy sentences. The natural language has structural dependencies, while the traditional convolutional neural network model often pays little attention to the contextual meaning of the
word, as a result, what are often obtained tend to be local features. Therefore, the introduction of Bi-directional Long Short-Term Memory (BiLSTM) can solve the context semantics and grammar information
of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [5] that cannot be
obtained problem. Besides, global features can be achieved in text recognition to increase the performance
of text classification.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
(1) A neural network model based on Attention mechanism and fusion of sentiment information is
proposed for the identification and classification of local adverse drug reactions in Xinjiang. The Attention mechanism is introduced to capture important text information. What’s more, it can improve the
capacity for expressing features. The experiment achieved the best results of current researches up to now.
(2) Introducing the BiLSTM model and using the BiLSTM model instead of the RNN model, combined with the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model, can cover the shortage of the LSTM
model’s obtaining local features of the text only. Furthermore, it can make full use of text context semantics and grammar information.
(3) Mixing emotional information with the features. It can enhance the expressive ability of the feature,
so as to let the neural network model learn quickly from the text. All of these are likely to achieve better
experimental results in the recognition and classification task based on the local adverse drug reaction in
Xinjiang.
(4) Constructing a corpus. Due to the intricate corpora on the Internet, there is currently no corpus in
Chinese that can be used consistently for the classification of adverse drug reactions. Therefore, this paper
constructs a Chinese corpus based on the adverse drug reactions in Xinjiang according to the screening
rules, which lays significance on the studies of the identification and classification of adverse drug reactions.
2. RELATED WORKS
In recent years, as deep learning continues to be hot and widely used in the field of natural language
processing, many scholars have begun to use the CNN model and LSTM and other deep learning models
for the identification of adverse drug reactions [6, 7]. In recent years, Chiu, Huang and Lample et al. have
used several neural network models into the identification and classification of the adverse drug reactions
and have yielded fruitful results. By using a history-based structured learning method, Miwa and Sasaki
integrated the global characteristics and selected the appropriate learning method and search order. They
finally came to the result that this method is superior to pipeline learning. Bekoulis, Deleu and Demeester
applied the Adversarial training (AT) training method to improve the robustness of the neural network by
adding the AT regularization method in the training data set. Compared with Miwa and Sasaki, AT training method increased by 1% when it comes to the F-score value of the experimental results on the same
data set. In the boundary assessment, compared with Bekoulis et al., AT training method has about 3%
improvement in both the entity recognition and relationship extraction tasks [8]. An incremental joint
framework proposed by Li and Ji uses a structured approach to the entity in the user medication review.
Identification, in this joint framework, is a segmentation decoder based on the semi-Markov chain idea,
which overcomes the traditional symbol-based annotation method. Hassan Alhuzali et al. [9] used the
attention mechanism to perform experiments in the SemEval17-task4A corpus, and the F-score value
increased by an average of 3%. Shaika Chowdhury et al. [10] proposed a multi-tasking neural network
framework for extracting ADR instances and all of the tasks have gained improvement. Korkontzelos et al.
[11] did experiment on the basic of the tweeter data set and the user’s negative information, which came
to the result that F-score value increased from 66.91 to 69.16%. Therefore, using the attention mechanism
AUTOMATIC CONTROL AND COMPUTER SCIENCES

Vol. 54

No. 5

2020

DRUG ADVERSE REACTION DISCOVERY BASED ON ATTENTION MECHANISM
Input attention matrix
Multiple
features
matrix

Classiﬁcation

Joint layer
Convolution layer

Attention
matrix

393

Dense layer
BiLSTM layer
Softmax result

Weight
matrix

Fig. 1. ACB neural network model framework.

and emotional information is feasible for dealing with the identification and classification of local adverse
drug reactions in Xinjiang.
In China, scholars have done relative researches on drug adverse reactions. ZHAO et al. proposed a
protein correlation tightness function based on the word2vec and skip-gram models [12] for discovering
the “potential” adverse reactions caused by drugs. They also put forward an algorithm based on information entropy to identify potential adverse drug reactions. To their delight, the correlation protein
extraction results are finally achieved among 600.237 drug users’ comments. It shows that the highest correlation protein result can reach 83%, which means adverse drug reactions, can not only be found, but also
be used to exploit potential adverse drug reactions. Segun et al. [13] proposed the Naive Bayes and Support
Vector Machines(NBSVM) model to achieve 91% F-score on the tweets dataset. Eric et al. [14] proposed
using bootstrap to identify potential drug adverse events on tweets and introduced the Adverse drug events
(ADE) detection system. Wu et al. [15] proposed a multi-headed attention mechanism and F-score
reached 91.83% in Social Media Mining for Health Applications(SMM4H). Aron et al. [16] used clinically documented information to predict adverse drug reactions.
3. METHODS
The ACB model is used to extract the local features of the text by using the feature matrix and the
weight matrix to generate the attention matrix as the input of the convolutional neural network CNN [17],
and combine the BiLSTM model to mine the sequence data information. Therefore, the task of identifying and classifying adverse drug reaction is effectively completed. The ACB model is shown in Fig. 1. The
ACB model is mainly composed of five parts:
(1) Attention matrix input layer. Using the attention mechanism to calculate the weight of the characteristics (information about the patient and the disease, drugs’ name, adverse drug reaction, emotional
information) to find out the association between types and characteristics of adverse reaction. The combination of output weight matrix and the original features is called the attention matrix [18].
(2) Convolutional layer. In order to simplify the model of obtaining local features of input data, a layer
of convolution is chosen to extract features during the experiment, and the unsaturated function such as
ReLU, is used as the activation function. Besides, the robustness becomes higher after being trained.
(3) BiLSTM layer. When digging up sequence data information, people can use the gate control mechanism to control input, memory, etc. and predict at the same time. On one hand, BiLSTM can fix problems that RNN is more likely to cause, such as gradient explosion and gradient disappearance. Besides, it
can also make up LSTM’s defect – one-way learning. On the other hand, BiLSTM is less likely to be overfitted during the training.
(4) Fully connected layer. The fully connected layer is usually placed at the end of the network and is
used to synthesize all information. Features representation gained in the convolutional layer and BiLSTM
layer is mapped to the sample mark space. In this paper, the full connection layer adopts Softmax as the
activation function.
AUTOMATIC CONTROL AND COMPUTER SCIENCES

Vol. 54

No. 5

2020

394

KEMING KANG et al.

I felt terribly uncomfortable after taking the Imusac tablet three
days later. My stomach got more afflictive at 2 to 3 am in the
morning.

Fig. 2. Emotional information example.

(5) Output layer. The output of the model belongs to adverse reaction category. In this paper, the model
is a binary-classification issue (Whether there are adverse drug reactions), which is able to precisely identify the category of adverse drug reaction.
3.1. Features Processing
Emotional information: sentence-level features hide important information and play a key role in
improving the efficiency of drug adverse reaction recognition and classification tasks. In the following Fig. 2,
the emotional information “uncomfortable,” “afflictive” is user’s subjective emotion. The sequence
labeling can be used to mark it in the experiment. Among users’ medication comment, the emotional
information generally appears in the form of adjectives. So when it comes to mark corpus, it’s better to set
specific weights for the adjectives and introduce them into features. The adjectives “uncomfortable,”
“afflictive” can objectively reflect users’ medication experiences when they take drugs. Therefore, emotional information can provide a key basis for identifying adverse drug reactions.
Features fusion:in the task of identifying and classifying adverse drug reactions, the feature information
needs to be introduced in order to accurately obtain the relationship between drug and drug adverse reactions. In addition to drugs’ names, adverse drug reactions, indications, and semantic categories, features
in this paper also include the combined information of drug ingredients and emotional words. Unlike
experiments of the past, this experiment sets weights correspondingly for the emotional words (adjectives)
in users’ comments, which enriches the feature vector and improves the feature’s expressive ability. In this
way, it provides a key point for the identification and classification task of adverse drug reactions. Finally,
the part-of-speech features, semantic features, entity features, emotional features and so on are integrated. The experimental feature fusion pseudo code is shown in Table 1.
3.2. Attention Mechanism
Drug composition attention mechanism: users’ medication comments contain a large amount of drug
composition information, so establishing a drug component attention mechanism can provide a more
powerful potential evidence chain for the researches on drug adverse reaction recognitions and discovery
tasks. First, extract all entities in the corpus to establish a physical dictionary: I = {e1, e2, e3 … en}, in which
ei represents an entity and i ∈ [1, n] . Extract I’s drug component information: In = {Ir1, Ir2, Ir3, Ir4 … Irm},
Table 1. Features fusion
Code:
1. subtrainLabel = pd.read_csv('./data/label.csv')
2. subtrainfeature1= pd.read_csv(“./data/train.csv”)
3. subtrain=pd.merge(subtrainLabel,subtrainfeature1,on='Id')
4. labels = subtrain.Class
5. subtrain.drop([“Class”, “Id”],axis=1,inplace=True)
6. subtrain = subtrain.as_matrix()
AUTOMATIC CONTROL AND COMPUTER SCIENCES

Vol. 54

No. 5

2020

DRUG ADVERSE REACTION DISCOVERY BASED ON ATTENTION MECHANISM

395

where Iri indicates a drug component and i ∈ [1, m]. Extract the drug component in In respectively and get
a drug component attention matrix as the following formula:

eit = f AT ( zt −1, vi ) ,

(1)

( ) ,
 exp (e )

(2)

T
Ci,i

=

exp eit

M

t
j

j =1

vi represents the word vector of the drug component Iri , and zt −1 is Iri 's context information at the time of
t – 1. f AT is a softmax scoring function, and matrix C T indicates the importance of each drug component
(that is, the probability). The attention feature matrix C T can be rewritten into the following formula:
T
Ci,i

=α

( ) ,
 exp (e )
exp eit

(3)

M

t
j

j =1

α is an adjustable parameter, indicating the importance of each drug component. The model input matrix
can be obtained by using the obtained attention feature matrix and the ei entity vector matrix operation:
Inputit = xi ⊕ CiT,i .

(4)

Among them, ⊕ represents the splicing operation. In this paper, the attention input matrix is combined
with the simple splicing operation of the drug component word vector to construct the model input
matrix.
Part-of-speech attention mechanism: considering the redundancy of users’ medication comments, not
every word in comments has referential value for the experiment. For its sake, this paper contains the partof-speech attention mechanism, which can make the model care about adverse reactions in comments
from another aspect, and then more potential information can be further obtained.
After segmenting the user’s drug reviews, words’ part-of-speech can be distinguished. As for the task
of identifying and classifying adverse drug reactions, key points are the drug’s name, indications, components and adverse drug reactions.
In the sentence s = {w1, w2, w3, … wi, … wn}, wi represents the part-of-speech tagging result of the i-th
word in s. In the drug adverse reaction recognition and classification task, the experiment pays more
attention to components of nouns, adjectives and verbs, all of which basically includes the drug’s name,
indications, components and adverse drug reactions. The final result of the annotation is the splicing of
the current part of the word of wi and wi. As is shown in Table 2:

Bi = w1 ⊕ c1, w2 ⊕ c2,… wn ⊕ cn,

(5)

Bi represents the final form of representation of s’ part-of-speech tagging result, while cn means the form
of the n-th word in s. Based on Bi , the form of word attention mechanism matrix can be shown as follows:
n

B=α

f
i =1

AT

( wi ⊕ ci )

(6)
.
n
Among them, α is an adjustable parameter, indicating the importance degree of corresponding word’s
form in s. In the task of identifying and classifying adverse drug reactions, the α parameter can be set for
the noun component, the adjective component and the verb component. Besides, α can also be set internally in the experiment. The higher the α is, the more important the word’s form in s is.
The annotation results in s can be integrated into a part-of-speech vector matrix B I *V , where I is the
dictionary size, and V is the word vector dimension mapped by each part-of-speech annotation, and B I *V
is the part-of-speech attention matrix.
AUTOMATIC CONTROL AND COMPUTER SCIENCES

Vol. 54

No. 5

2020

396

KEMING KANG et al.

Table 2. Part-of-speech tagging

Words

Part-of -speech

(HanchuanZupa

Label result

nn_noun

Granules)

/nn

(used for)

v_verb

/v

(acute)

a_adjective

/a

(cold)

v_verb

/v

wp_symbol

ˈ/wp

(may)

c_conjunction

/c

(cause)

v_verb

/v

(dizziness)

v_verb

/v

v_verb

/wp

(powerless)

wp_symbol

/v

(many more)

v_verb

/v

nn_noun

/nn

(phenomenon)

wp_symbol

/wp

3.3. BiLSTM
BiLSTM is a new neural network structure proposed by Augenstein et al to improve RNN and LSTM.
For one thing, it can overcome the point that RNN can’t acquire text context semantic information and
gradient disappearance or gradient explosion [19]. For another thing, BiLSTM can make up the thing that
LSTM can only be used for one-way learning.
The basic structure of the BiLSTM model is shown in Fig. 3. In the figure, the sentences {w(1), w(2), …,
w(n)} is the output of the CNN model, and then the sentences {w(1), w(2), …, w(n)} are learned through
BiLSTM, and the characteristics of the text are based on the information of the whole sentence, making
full use of the context and grammar information of each word in the sentence. Cir and Cil represent the
right and left implicit unit states respectively, and h1l and hnr decibels represent the output of the left and
right hidden layers respectively. Learning from the right layer first and can get Cnr. When it comes to the
left one, C1l can be gained. Through the end-to-end connection of the hidden vector, the final output vector C can be obtained which contains the overall information of the text and enhances the expression performance of features. The experimental results show that the BiLSTM neural network has stronger performance in text feature learning tasks, compared with traditional LSTM and RNN.
3.4. ACB Model
ACB model can be obtained from Fig. 1. What is inputted into the input layer is the regular feature f,
which is composed of drugs and the adverse drug reaction information, and which is the input of the attention matrix layer. Calculate the attention weight at first, and the formula is as follows:

Ci = tanf ( w f fi + b f ) ,
AUTOMATIC CONTROL AND COMPUTER SCIENCES

(7)
Vol. 54

No. 5

2020

DRUG ADVERSE REACTION DISCOVERY BASED ON ATTENTION MECHANISM

397

C
hnr

h1I
Convolution layer
outputs

C1I
C1r

C2I
Cir

C2r

W(1)

Cnl

Cil
Cnr

W(n)

W(i)

W(2)

Fig. 3. BiLSTM layer.

L

exp (C ) .

Ai = exp (Ci )

(8)

o

o =1

In the above formula, fi represents the i-th feature; w f means the weight; b f represents the offset, and
Ai represents fi ’s attention weight, which can lead to the output att of the attention mechanism:
L

att =

A

(9)

k fk .

k =1

The output matrix of the attention mechanism is taken as the input of the joint processing layer. It is
processed by CNN first to get the local features of the text as well as to obtain more syntactic and grammatical information. Feature vector diagram (Ft) can be obtained through CNN:

Ft = f ( fw att + fb ) ,

(10)

fw stands for the weight matrix; att means the output result of the attention mechanism input layer and fb
is the offset of the function f. Further process Ft and can get:

Fp = {c1, c2, c3,…, ci,… cn} .

(11)

Among them, n stands for convolution kernels’ number. The feature map needs a further pooling operation. After the pooling layer processing of m windows, it can be obtained:

Fp' = { p1, p2, p3,… pi,… pm} .

(12)

Then regard Fp' and the result of BiLSTM layers as the input of the fully connected layer. The activation function used in the ACB model is a sigmoid function, which makes the expressive ability of the ACB
model more powerful, among which:

sigmoid( x) = 1/((1 + exp(− x ))).

(13)

In the fully connected layer, the features obtained by CNN and BiLSTM are merged into a fusion feature matrix –merge:

merge = M ( Fcnn, Fbilstm ) .

(14)

With the softmax classifier, the merge can turn into the final classification result r:

r = softmax ( wi merge + bi ) ,

(15)

wi represents the weight matrix in the fully connected layer; bi stands for the offset. The bp backpropagation algorithm is used for the excitation propagation and the chain derivative is used to update and iterate
the weight until minimize to the error into a smallest one.
AUTOMATIC CONTROL AND COMPUTER SCIENCES

Vol. 54

No. 5

2020

398

KEMING KANG et al.

Table 3. Experimental parameter setting
Parameter

p-Name

e
m
b
e
f
t

Value

epochs
max_Features
batch_Size
embedding_Dims
filter_Size
time_Steps

60
105
30
30
15
30

Table 4. Compared with previous experiments
Model
Trung (CNNA)
Gabriel (RASCAL+ DBpedia+ Blekko)
Sara (shallow analysis and machine learning method)
ACB

P (×100%)

R (×100%)

F (×100%)

0.82
0.96
0.93
0.95

0.84
0.75
0.85
0.98

0.83
0.84
0.88
0.97

4. EXPERIMENTS
4.1. Dataset
At present, all major medical platforms provide data for adverse drug reaction research. In order to
illustrate the reliability of the experimental model, the ACB model is used to train on the open adverse
drug tweets dataset. In the experiment, F-Score can reach 0.91 on average. Since the research data of this
paper is for Xinjiang’s local adverse drug reactions, the dataset in this paper is derived from the major
online social media based on Xinjiang local medicine. The users’ medication comments in social media
reflect users’ real experiences. A total of 11392 comments were selected from major drug consultation
websites, like blogs, Weibo, Baidu Post Bar, news journals, etc., and all of 11392 comments have been
annotated under experts’ guidance. Among the comments, the number of positive drug adverse reactions
(including ADR entities) is 4152 while the negative (excluding ADR entities) of that is 7240, making the
ratio of positive to negative examples 1 : 1.74. The ratio of training to test sets in the experiment is about 0.2, and
the length of each corpus is about 25 Chinese characters. In the process of labeling, according to the guidance of experts, the method of sequence labeling is adopted to select the multi-class features so as to
ensure that each marked corpus can provide sufficient theoretical evidence, while current adverse drug
reaction test corpus is also increasingly expanding.
4.2. Model Hyperparameter
In the experiment, after continuous training and adjustment of the experimental model, the classified
results reach best when the experimental parameters are set the same as the parameters in Table 3. The
experimental parameter adjustment method used in this paper first performs random initialization
parameters and then uses the gradient descent to minimize the objective function in the experiment,
where the dropout setting is loaded in the neural network layer to prevent the model from overfitting, and
the result turns best to optimize the setting of dropout = 0.2.
4.3. Experimental Results and Analysis
In the task of identifying and classifying adverse drug reactions, in order to verify the validity of the
ACB model of fuse emotional information, this paper compares the experimental results of the ACB
model with the experimental results of previous researches. And the ACB model achieves the optimal classification effect.
The results of contract are shown in Table 4. As can be seen from the table, the best experimental result
for the Convolutional Neural Network with Attention (CNNA) model proposed by Trunget al. is 0.83 [20],
and that of RASCAL (Rapid Adjudication of Semantic Classes to Accelerate Learning) + DBpedia
(DBpedia is a large-scale cross-domain multilingual knowledge base extracted from Wikipedia [23]) +
AUTOMATIC CONTROL AND COMPUTER SCIENCES

Vol. 54

No. 5

2020

DRUG ADVERSE REACTION DISCOVERY BASED ON ATTENTION MECHANISM

1.00

Add attention
No attention

0.95
F-Score, %

399

0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70

1

2

3

4

5
6
7
Epochs, *10

8

9

10

Fig. 4. Attention mechanism experimental performance comparison.

1.0
0.9
0.8
F-Score, %

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

cnn

att_cnn

att_lstm att_bilstm att_cnn_gru ACB
Model Name

Fig. 5. Model performance comparison.

Blekko (a 2GB corpus of web pages categorized as “medical domain” by the Blekko search engine [24])
proposed by Gabriel et al. [21] is 0.84. While the best experimental result obtained by combining shallow
analysis and machine learning method proposed by Sara is 0.91 [22].
In order to verify the effectiveness of the ACB model based on Attention mechanism and fuse emotional information in the identification and classification of adverse drug reactions from different respects,
this paper conducted four sets of comparative experiments.
(1) Compare experiments in the identification and classification of adverse drug reactions with or
without Attention mechanism.
In order to verify the effectiveness of the attention mechanism in the identification and classification
of adverse drug reactions, as below is a comparison experiment with the attention mechanism and without it.
The experimental results are shown in Fig. 4.
(2) Compare the performance of this model with that of other experimental models.
In order to verify the effectiveness of the ACB model in the identification and classification of adverse
drug reactions, the performance of the ACB model was compared with that of the separate cnn model,
attention_cnn model, attention_lstm model, attention_bilstm model and attention_cnn_gru model. The
AUTOMATIC CONTROL AND COMPUTER SCIENCES

Vol. 54

No. 5

2020

400

KEMING KANG et al.

1.00

F-Score, %

0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70

Add emotional feature
No emotional feature
1

2

3

4

5
6
7
Epochs, *10

8

9

10

F-Score, %

Fig. 6. The effect of emotional characteristics on experimental performance.

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

10

30
50
100
Dimension of embedding

150

Fig. 7. Influence of different word vector dimensions on experimental performance.

same data set was used in this comparison experiment to ensure that each model is tested under the premise of adaptive optimal parameters. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 5.
(3) The effect on experimental performance by adding emotional features or not.
Emotional characteristics, which contain users’ realistic feelings when they publish their comments on
drugs, can be used to determine whether the drug has a potential basis for drug adverse reactions. The
trained model, with drug users’ emotional information, can be more robust. Emotional information can
be positive, negative as well as neutral. When users make comments on medicine, positive emotional texts
are often contained in negative experimental examples, while neutral and negative ones are often in positive examples. In order to dig out potential information in users’ medication reviews, it can make the
model be better learned with emotional information. In order to verify the validity of the ACB model with
emotional information, the ACB model is trained under the premise of with or without emotional information. The experimental result of performances under different conditions is shown in Fig. 6.
(4) The effect of word vector dimension on experimental performance.
The obtained word vector contains rich lexical semantics and contextual relationship information. In
the experiment, different word vector dimensions have different effects on experimental performance, and
the semantic information contained in different word vector dimensions shows differences as well. In
order to get the optimal word vector dimension, it is necessary to continuously adjust and update the
experimental parameters. This paper selects 10, 30, 50, 100, 150 as the word vector dimension to conduct
experiments. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 7.
AUTOMATIC CONTROL AND COMPUTER SCIENCES

Vol. 54

No. 5

2020

DRUG ADVERSE REACTION DISCOVERY BASED ON ATTENTION MECHANISM

401

5. CONCLUSIONS
The study of adverse drug reactions can help solve the safety problems in the medical field, and provide
theoretical guidance for drug users and drug R&D (research and development) departments. The existing
researches are mainly aimed at public drug reviews at home and abroad, but researches on the adverse
drug reactions of Xinjiang local medicine are few. What’s worse, most researches are based directly on the
existing medical database, while the text recognition and text context semantics and grammar information
are rarely considered. Considering above deficiencies, this paper proposes an ACB model based on Attention mechanism and fusion of emotional information for the task of identifying and classifying adverse
drug reactions in Xinjiang local medicine. This method introduces quite a few attention mechanisms,
such as the attention mechanism of the drug components and that of the words, which helps to do its
utmost to obtain the key information in the text. Adding emotional information can make the ACB model
obtain the text context semantics and global grammatical information, and learn the relationship and
dependence of each word in the sentence faster. The experimental results show that the performance of
the ACB model based on Attention mechanism and fusion of emotional information has significantly
improved the identification and classification of adverse drug reactions in Xinjiang local medicine.
Similarly, the ACB model can be used to research other adverse drug reactions. No matter whether the
experimental data is in Chinese, English or other languages, we can first process the corpus and use
word2vec to vectorize the features, which are composed of numbers as the input of ACB model. At the
same time, in the future research, we need to further eliminate the ambiguity of words, improve the training efficiency and enrich the corpus.
FUNDING
This research is partially supported by The National Natural Science Foundation of China (nos. 61563051,
61662074, 61262064), the Key Project of National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 61331011), Xinjiang
Uygur Autonomous Region Scientific and Technological Personnel Training Project (no. QN2016YX0051), and
Xinjiang Tianshan Youth Project (no. 2017Q011).
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1. Leaman, R., Wojtulewicz, L., Sullivan, R., Skariah, A., Yang, J., and Gonzalez, G., Towards internet-age pharmacovigilance: Extracting adverse drug reactions from user posts to health-related social networks, Proceedings
of the 2010 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, Uppsala, 2010, pp. 117–125.
2. Yates, A. and Goharian, N., ADRTrace: Detecting expected and unexpected adverse drug reactions from user
reviews on social media sites, ECIR 2013: Advances in Information Retrieval, 2013, pp. 816–819.
3. Giacomini, K.M., Krauss, R.M., Roden, D.M., et al., When good drugs do bad, Nature, 2007, vol. 446,
no. 7139, pp. 975–977.
4. Leaman, R., Wojtulewicz, L., Sullivan, R., Skariah, A., Yang, J., and Gonzalez, G., Towards internet-age pharmacovigilance: Extracting adverse drug reactions from user posts to health-related social networks, Proceedings
of the 2010 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, Uppsala, 2010, pp. 117–125.
5. Perez, A., Casillas, A., and Gojenola, K., Fully unsupervised low-dimensional representation of adverse drug
reaction events through distributional semantics, Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Building and Evaluating
Resources for Biomedical Text Mining (BioTxtM 2016), Osaka, 2016, pp. 50–59.
6. Segura-Bedmar, I., De La Pena, S., and Martinez, P., Extracting drug indications and adverse drug reactions
from Spanish health social media, in Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing
(BioNLP 2014), Baltimore, MD, 2014, pp. 98–106.
7. Segura-Bedmar, I., Revert, R., and Martinez, P., Detecting drugs and adverse events from Spanish health social
media streams, Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis
(Louhi) EACL 2014, Gothenburg, 2014, pp. 106–115.
8. Ryan, R.J., Groundtruth budgeting: A novel approach to semi-supervised relation extraction of medical language, Master’s (Eng.) Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2011.
9. Alhuzali, H. and Ananiadou, S., Improving classification of adverse drug reactions through using sentiment
analysis and transfer learning, Proceedings of the 18th BioNLP Workshop and Shared Task, 2019, pp. 339–347.
AUTOMATIC CONTROL AND COMPUTER SCIENCES

Vol. 54

No. 5

2020

402

KEMING KANG et al.

10. Chowdhury, S., Zhang, C., and Yu, P.S., Multi-task pharmacovigilance mining from social media posts, Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference—International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee,
2018, pp. 117–126.
11. Korkontzelos, I., et al., Analysis of the effect of sentiment analysis on extracting adverse drug reactions from
tweets and forum posts, J. Biomed. Inf., 2016, vol. 62, pp. 148–158.
12. Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., et al., Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality, Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2013, pp. 3111–3119.
13. Aroyehun, S.T. and Gelbukh, A., Automatic identification of drugs and adverse drug reaction related tweets,
Proceedings of the 3rd Social Media Mining for Health Applications (SMM4H) Workshop & Shared Task, Brussels,
2018, pp. 54–55.
14. Benzschawel, E., Identifying potential adverse drug events in tweets using bootstrapped lexicons, in Proceedings
of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics—Student Research Workshop, Berlin,
2016, pp. 15–21.
15. Chuhan Wu, Fangzhao Wu, Junxin Liu, Sixing Wu, Yongfeng Huang, and Xing Xie, Detecting tweets mentioning drug name and adverse drug reaction with hierarchical tweet representation and multi-head self-attention,
Proceedings of the 3rd Social Media Mining for Health Applications (SMM4H) Workshop & Shared Task, Brussels,
2018, pp. 34–37.
16. Henriksson, A., Representing clinical notes for adverse drug event detection, Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Health Text Mining and Information Analysis (Louhi), Lisbon, 2015, pp. 152–158.
17. Jin Wang, Liang-Chih Yu, Lai, K.R., and Xuejie Zhang, Dimensional sentiment analysis using a regional
CNN–LSTM model, Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Berlin, 2016, pp. 225–230.
18. Shin, B., Lee, T., and Cho, J.D., Lexicon integrated CNN models with attention for sentiment analysis, Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis,
Copenhagen, 2017, pp. 149–158.
19. Tian Sheng-Wei, Qin Yue, Yu Long, Turglm Ibrahim, and Feng Guan-jun, Anaphora resolution of Uyghur personal pronouns based on Bi-LSTM, Acta Electron. Sin., 2018, vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 1691–1699.
20. Trung, H., He, Yu., Willis, A., and Ruger, S., Adverse drug reaction classification with deep neural networks,
Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th International Conference on Computational Linguistics: Technical Papers,
Osaka, 2016, pp. 877–887.
21. Stanovsky, G., Gruhl, D., and Mendes, P.N., Recognizing mentions of adverse drug reaction in social media
using knowledge-infused recurrent models, Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Valencia, 2017, vol. 1, pp. 142–151.
22. Santiso, S., Perez, A., Gojenola, K., Casillas, A., and Oronoz, M., Adverse drug event prediction combining
shallow analysis and machine learning, Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Health Text Mining and
Information Analysis (Louhi) EACL 2014, Gothenburg, 2014, pp. 85–89.
23. Lehmann, J., Isele, R., Jakob, M., Jentzsch, A., Kontokostas, D., Mendes, P.N., Hellmann, S., Morsey, M.,
van Kleef, P., Auer, S., and Bizer, C., DB-pedia: A large-scale, multilingual knowledge base extracted from
Wikipedia, Semantic Web J., 2015, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 167–195.
24. Stanovsky, G., Dagan, I., and Mausam, Open IE as an intermediate structure for semantic tasks, in Proceedings
of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, 2015, vol. 2, pp. 303–308.

AUTOMATIC CONTROL AND COMPUTER SCIENCES

Vol. 54

No. 5

2020

