Cluster Computing (2019) 22:S12827–S12837
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10586-018-1764-4

Socia media opinions aware adverse drug effect prediction and
prevention system for the secured health care medical environment
S. Nalini1 · P. Balasubramanie2
Received: 3 November 2017 / Revised: 29 December 2017 / Accepted: 8 January 2018 / Published online: 19 February 2018
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2018

Abstract
Predicting adverse drug effects is difficult which is focused in various research works that focus on predicting the adverse
effects of drugs based user reviews gathered from the social media. However those research works cannot accurately predict
the user opinions side effects. These problems are resolved in the proposed research work by introducing the framework called
“adverse drug effect aware drug recommendation system”. This research work focus on the online reviews about the drug
reaction which is gathered from the twitter social media website. These reviews are analyzed to find the reaction of users in
terms of positive reaction or negative reaction based on adverse effects. In this work training is done on the tweet data corpus
downloaded from online to learn the negative and positive impact words. Initially preprocessing is done on the retrieved data
reviews to eliminate unwanted words and result with only required data contents without noises and repeated data by using
successor variety stemmer’s algorithm. After preprocessing, optimal feature selection is done on the preprocessed terms to
select the most optimal terms that represent the drug reactions by using hybrid generic particle swarm optimization algorithm.
Finally classification is done by using improved transductive support vector machine algorithm. The entire proposed work is
simulated and analyzed in the matlab simulation environment from which it can be proved that the proposed research work
tends to increased performance than the existing research methodologies.
Keywords Adverse drug effects · Features reasonable for the drug effects · Optimal feature selection · Prediction of drug
effects

1 Introduction
Adverse drug reaction (ADR) is defined as serious of effects
happening on the human bodies due to irregular usage of
drugs without doctor prescription [1]. ADR will affect the
people from their day to day activities by generating more
side effects [2]. So that secured environment for the patients
can be ensured without any adverse effects while taking medications. There is various kind of ADR effects are happening
on human bodies [3]. Those are categorized into two types in
major namely category A reaction and category B reactions.
Category A reactions happed due to over dosage consumed
by the patients whereas category B reactions happen due to

B

S. Nalini
nalinis985@rediffmail.com

1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Velammal
Institute of Technology, Chennai, India

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Kongu
Engineering College, Perundurai, India

allergic to the corresponding drug. Here category B reaction
found to be more dangerous than the category A reactions [4].
These reactions would result in serious threat to the humans
which might affects normal living life. Thus it is required to
analyze and predict the adverse drug effects that happening
during the improper consumption of medicines [5].
The drug effect identification is the more difficult process
which is focused in this research method [6]. These drug
information needs to be gathered from the living who are
making use of those drugs [7]. However it is complex to
gather information from the living things which needs to be
processed in the efficient manner. Social media make this
process simple by providing user friendly environment for
researchers to gather the opinion information about the drugs
from the lots of patients [8]. People tends to post their reviews
about the corresponding drugs in online which can be gathered through social media, so that proper opinion decision
about the drugs can be made out. In this research work, drugs
reviews are gathered from the twitter social media website
in the efficient manner [9].

123

S12828

The main goal of this proposed research work is to implement the secured environment for the researchers to analyze
and predict the drugs opinions from the user reviews which
are gathered from the social media twitter website. The
accurate adverse drug effect identification is ensured in the
proposed research method by introducing the research techniques. These techniques would preprocess the data reviews,
would select the optimal features that represent user review
about drugs and finally would be classified as positive or negative opinions. If the opinions about the drugs are found to
be negative then that particular drug would be added into the
block list. By doing so, secured environment for the patients
can be ensured by suggesting proper medication that would
not cause any adverse drug effects.

2 Related works
In this section, discussion about the different research techniques that attempts to find the varying drug effects that are
happening while taking different types of medications has
been given. Varying number of related research works has
been given with their procedure description based on which
novel proposed method has been identified.
In [10], authors introduced the link classification approach
for the accurate prediction of adverse drug effects. This
approach would construct the graph by linking the drugs that
are taken and the corresponding adverse effect happened due
to that symptom. This method would be better small volume
of data set where it would be degraded in its performance in
case of large volume of dataset. In [11], authors implemented
two techniques namely maximum likelihood technique and
the bayesian network model for the adverse drug effect identification. This method evaluated its performance by using
the observational medical outcomes partnership (OMOP)
dataset which can detect the adverse drug effects however
with less accuracy of prediction rate.
In [12], authors had been conducted the survey analysis
on applying varying data mining techniques on prediction of
adverse drug effects which would lead to varying chemical
reaction. This work provides a way of applying data mining
techniques on the drugs dataset to provide proper prediction
rate. In [13], authors had utilized online medical forms to
extract the information about drug reviews from the users.
This work attempted to implement the online source from
which data set can be generated efficiently. In [14], authors
have utilized social media websites for the retrieving the drug
reviews from the users which is proved to be work well better
than the online forum concept mentioned in the work.
In [15], authors had constructed the drug interaction
network for the prediction of the drug usage and its corresponding effects made. This is done by using probabilistic
soft logic technique. In [16], authors concentrated on find-

123

Cluster Computing (2019) 22:S12827–S12837

ing ways for improving the medications counseling process
by introducing various phases. In [17], authors introduced
multi view learning for the prediction of the drug effects
which would happen in multiple dimensional such drug effect
due to, “incorrect dosage, wrong medication, improper food
habit, improper living nature, other causes and so on”. In
[18], authors introduced statistical assessment technique for
the prediction of adverse drug effects by learning the associations present the genes using gene association network.
In [19], flexible electrical record sharing procedure is discussed in detail to assure the optimal delivery of data to the
users who wants to access it. This research work focuses on
the security issues which might arises during sharing personal
health record. In [20], secured and flexible health care data
sharing system has been introduced whose main goal is to
retrieve and share the data with the assurance of data security.
The above research methods attempt to find the adverse
drug effects happening on humans by using different way of
procedure. However those methods cannot accurately predict
the adverse drug effects which needs to be process well for the
accurate identification of drug reaction, so that healthy and
secured environment for the patients can be ensured. These
problems are resolved in the proposed research methodology which is processed in the well efficient manner for the
accurate identification of drug effects. The detailed explanation of proposed research methodology that attempts to find
the adverse drug effects has been discussed in the following
section in the clear manner.

3 Optimal adverse drug reaction eﬀect
ﬁnding process
Adverse drug effect is the threats occurred due to incorrect
usage of medication which would affect the normal living
things of humans. These needs to be identified for every new
drug in order to make decision whether to continue with that
drug or not. The main goal of proposed research method is
to identify the adverse drug effects accurately to make sure
the proper medication advice. This research work focus on
the online reviews about the drug reaction which is gathered from the twitter social media website. These reviews
are analyzed to find the reaction of users in terms of positive
reaction or negative reaction based on adverse effects. In this
work training is done on the tweet data corpus downloaded
from online to learn the negative and positive impact words.
Initially preprocessing is done on the retrieved data reviews to
eliminate unwanted words and result with only required data
contents without noises and repeated data by using successor
variety stemmer’s algorithm. After preprocessing, optimal
feature selection is done on the preprocessed terms to select
the most optimal terms that represent the drug reactions
by using hybrid generic particle swarm optimization algo-

Cluster Computing (2019) 22:S12827–S12837

S12829

Twitter Social
Media
ADR twitter
dataset

Drug Name
Repository

Extract user reviews from
twitter

Learning (Training) using
ITSVM

Construct drug dictionary
Preprocessing twitter
dataset using SVS
Drug dictionary
Optimal feature selection
using HGAPSO

Learned Knowledge

Prediction (Testing) using
ITSVM

Yes
Is it negative
opinion?

Eliminate from dictionary

No
Add into dictionary

Update Dictionary

Fig. 1 Overall view of proposed research method

rithm (HGA-PSO). Finally classification is done by using
Improved Transductive support vector machine (ITSVM).
The overall view of the proposed research method is shown
in the following Fig. 1.
The flow of proposed research methodologies can be seen
over Fig. 1, whose main goal is to avoid the drugs opinion on
the future prescription based on user opinions. The detailed
explanation of the proposed research methodology is shown
in the following sub sections.

3.1 Drug dictionary construction
Initially drug dictionary is constructed from already available
drug details. This drug information is retrieved from the website http://www.emedexpert.com/lists/hypertension.shtml.
This website contains various lists of drugs compiled as per
user convenience. Among the lists there are: list of antibiotics, list of antidepressants, and list of pain medications.
This website contains two useful tools. It allows users to

quickly find generic versions of brand-name drugs and the
other one brand-name drugs of commonly used generics.
However, that brand names listed for each generic drug may
not include all brands available in the United States. The most
common ones are listed. Inclusion of a brand name does not
imply recommendation or endorsement. Exclusion does not
imply that a missing brand name is less effective or less safe
than the one listed. The sample drug names that are considered in this research work are listed in Fig. 2.
The drug dictionary constructed in this way would be kept
for future use where the learning of the drug features would
be done. This learned information will be used in future to
predict the drug information present in the user posted comments.

3.2 ADR twitter dataset collection
In this research work, twitter annotated corpus has been utilized for the learning purpose which would learn the drugs

123

S12830

Cluster Computing (2019) 22:S12827–S12837

Antacide
Bismuth subsalicyclate
Histamine H2 receptor antagonists
Hyoscyamin
Proton pump inhibitors
simithecone
Fig. 2 Sample drug names
Fig. 4 Sample user reviews about drugs

and its adversary effects in the efficient manner. In our work,
tweets about drugs are gathered from the twitter social media
website. This data set would consist of drug names and its
adversary effects with annotation labels. The dataset consists
of 1784 tweets which are gathered from the multiple user
tweets from the twitter social media website. The dataset
sample is shown in the following Fig. 3.

3.3 User reviews collection from twitter website
The user posted comments would be retrieved from the twitter website using matlab simulation environment at run time.
Twitter is an online news and social networking service where
users post and interact with messages, “tweets,” restricted to
140 characters. Registered users can post tweets, but those
who are unregistered can only read them. Twitter is social
media network which allows users to post their comments
and reviews about the news and general topics. Users can
post news related to every topic of their wish.
In the proposed research work, user tweets about the drug
opinions are gathered which would be processed in order to
find the user opinions as positive or negative opinions. The
sample user tweets are shown in Fig. 4.

3.4 Preprocessing user tweets
The tweets gathered from the user website would consist
various unwanted information such as labels, tags, symbols,
repeated words and so on. These words would reduce the preFig. 3 Sample ADR twitter data
set

123

Able, ape, beatable, finable, read, readable, reading, reads, red, rope, ripe

Fig. 5 Successor category types

diction performance adversary drug effect detection. Thus it
is required to perform preprocessing before preceding it to the
further processing to find opinion analysis. In this research
work, Successor Variety Stemmers (SVS) algorithm is used
to perform preprocessing. SVS algorithm adapts the concept
of structural linguistics procedures whose main goal is to
identify the words and range boundaries of words in terms of
phonemes distribution. That is SVS algorithms are based on
stemming algorithm which performs preprocessing based on
letter frequencies. Successor category is defined as the number of characters or words that are present within the body of
multiple words. The example of successor category is shown
in the following Fig. 5.
Consider the example scenario of finding successor variety of the word Able. First letter in able is A. A is followed
by 3 characters namely B, L and E thus its successor variety
is 3. The next successor variety is terms as 2 where the letter
A and B is followed by two letters namely L and E. This
process is shown in the following Table 1.
Once the successor variety for a given word is determined
then this information is used to segment the word. Peak and
Plateau method: In this method a segment break is made
after a character whose successor variety exceeds that of the
characters immediately preceding and following it.

Cluster Computing (2019) 22:S12827–S12837

S12831

Table 1 Successor variety for word able
Prefix

Successor variety

Letters

A

3

B, L, E

AB

2

L, E

ABL

1

E

ABLE

3

B, F, R

3.5 Optimal feature selection using HGAPSO
The preprocessing result would consist of set of words where
not every word would not be helpful during drug opinion prediction. It might consist of some irrelevant attributes
also. Thus it is required to select the optimal data from the
preprocessed data to increase the accuracy level of the prediction rate. In this research work, Hybridized Genetic-Particle
Swarm Optimization (HGA-PSO) approach is introduced
for the optimal selection of features. Genetic algorithm is
based on the biological behaviour of chromosomes where
its main goal is to identify optimal chromosome that satisfies the fitness values. Genetic algorithm can select the
more optimal solution; however it tends to have local solution trapping which would affect the selection of optimal
solution. This local optimal solution trapping problem can
be resolved by hybridizing it with the Particle Swarm Optimization approach during new solution updation phase.
Particle Swarm Optimization approach is based on biological behaviour of the flock of birds where the birds will move
in their position towards where the more quantity of food is
available. This behaviour of flock of birds in hybridized with
the genetic algorithm fitness value updation phase in order to
improve the efficiency of optimal feature selection process.
In this research fitness value is considered as classification
accuracy of particular features. The features that can lead to
increased classification accuracy can be selected as the optimal features. Here in order to test the classification accuracy
of particular selected features KNN classifier is utilized. In
the following sub section, procedure of HGAPSO algorithm
is given.
3.5.1 Hybridized genetic algorithm with particle swarm
optimization approach
Genetic algorithms are stochastic search algorithm which is
based on biological behaviour of chromosomes. This method
is mostly used in the areas of optimization problems, prediction tasks and so on. This method has been utilized in various
research fields which tend to provide the improved solution
on optimal solution identification. The main goal of GA is
to choose the more optimal solution that satisfies the fitness
values. Generally GA is represented in the binary format

which would be process in multiple iteration based on which
optimal decision would be taken. The most common function performed in the GA algorithm are cross over, mutation.
GA is proved to select the accurate solution, whereas it tends
to cause local solution trapping problem. This is resolved
by integrating it with the PSO algorithm. PSO is also an
evolutionary algorithm as like GA, where it is based on biological behaviour of birds in terms of finding its food. This
method consists of global best and local best solution which
can resolve the problem occurred in GA. Here fitness value is
updated based on velocity and position values. This approach
would be run for multiple iteration until it identifies the optimal solution.
The authors Fix and Hodges introduced the K-NN classifier approach on 1951 [4]. The main goal K-NN classifier
method is to learn the input training data based on which
optimal prediction outcome can be identified. K-NN adapts
the distance calculation procedure to identify the distance
among the training data and user submitted input data to
accurately predict the information provided. This process is
evaluated in this research method using leave-one out cross
validation (LOOCV) where given input training data would
be divided into 10 sub division. From that, first nine data sub
parts would be utilized for the training and the last remaining
data sub part would be utilized for the testing. In this research
method initially PSO is executed where initialized population of particles would be assumed as binary strings i.e.,
S=F1 , F2, , …,Fn , n=1,2,…,m. Here selected features would
be denoted as 1 and unselected features would be taken as 0.
Here optimal outcome is ensured by performing cross over
and mutation operations on the input set of features. Likewise the performance optimal feature selection is improvised
by performing PSO operation for each generation created by
genetic algorithm. Based on the iteration outcomes, in this
research method pbest and gbest values would be updated in
every iteration and calculation procedures are shows in the
following Eqs. (1), (2) & (3).

old
new
vnew
pd = wxvpd + c1 xrand1 x pbestpd .x
pd


old
+ c2 xrand2 x pbestpd .x
(1)
pd


1
(2)
s vnew
pd =
−vnew
1 + e pd



new
if rand < S vnew
then xnew
pd
pd = 1; else xpd = 0
(3)
In this algorithm, worst values of gbest are handled with
more at the end of each iteration to avoid the local optima
trapping problems. From those comparisons gbest values
would be updated, if it remains constant for the periodic
time. From the above equations, Eq. 1 is used to calcu-

123

S12832

Cluster Computing (2019) 22:S12827–S12837

late the velocity of particles by using which new features
is updated using Eq. 2. After updation of velocity of particle,
the selected features are indicated as 1 and the unselected features are indicated as 0. In the proposed research method, 20
chromosomes are generated initially which is evaluation for
100 generation in each possibility. The cross over and mutation rate are taken as 1.0 and 0.1 respectively. And then 20
particles are utilized in the next iteration for which two random numbers are taken over namely rand1 and rand2 whose
ranges are considered between (0, 1). Here inertia weight
value is taken as 0.9.

3.6 Prediction of drug effects using improved TSVM
After selection of the Optimal feature subset, classification is done in order to predict the classes to which it
belongs to. In this proposed research work ITSVM classification is done for the feature classification. In order to
test the optimal feature selection accuracy leave one out
cross validation technique is utilized in this research work
for checking the testing accuracy. In this section, ITSVM
algorithm is proposed to improve the classification accuracy.
 l Inl semi supervisednl learning algorithm, a sample feature
X , Y = {(Xi , Yi )}i=1 is observed with an independent
u
n
unlabeled
 sample X  = {Xj }nl+1 and n = nl + nu. Where
Xi = Xi1, . . . , Xip is an p-dimensional input and Yi ∈
{−1, 1}, independently and identically distributed according
to an unknown distribution P (x, y) , and Xu is distributed
according to distribution P (x). TSVM uses an idea of maximizing separation between labeled and unlabeled data. The
fitness of each individual is assessed by the accuracy of
leave-one-out cross-validation method (LOOCV). The leaveone-out cross-validation method can be described as follows:
when there are n data to be classified, the data are divided into
one testing sample and n − 1 training samples. Each individual will be selected as a testing sample in turn. The other n − 1
individuals serve as the training data set to determine the prediction parameter of the model. It solves by using following
Eq. (4)
minyj,f∈F C1
n
+ C2

nl



L yi f (xi )
  
L yj f xj + J (f)

i=1

j=nl+1

(4)

Where f. a decision function in F., candidate function class,
L (z) = (1 − z) is the hinge loss, and J(f) is the inverse of
the geometric separation margin. In the linear case, f (x) =
wT x + b and J (f) = 21 | |w| |2 . In the nonlinear kernel case,
f (x) = (K (x, x1 ) , . . . , K (x, xn )) wT + b, J (f) = 21 wT Kw,
where K. a kernel satisfying
 Mercer’s condition to assure

wT Kw with K = (K xi , xj )ni,j=1 . It performs the training
and testing on the specified datasets along with selected fea-

123

tures. The ITSVM model produces an accurate model and
the optimized classifier is obtained fort the given dataset.
1. (Initialization) set initial value f(0) as the solution of SVM
with labeled data and precision tolerance level  > 0
2. (Iteration) at iteration k+1, solve, yields solutionf(k+1)
3. Obtain the selected features from AABC algorithm
4. Run training and testing phase
5. (Stopping rule). Terminate when |s(f(k+1) −s(f(k) )| ≤ .
Then the estimate f̂ is the best solution among f(k) ; k =
0, 1, . . .
6. Retrieve the accurate classification results
The above algorithm can accurately predict the positive
and negative opinions about the corresponding set of features.
It provides more accuracy results by using trained features.

4 Experimental outcome
This section provides the performance evaluation of proposed research methodology which is conducted in the
matlab simulation environment. Here the proposed research
method namely adverse drug effect aware drug recommendation system” (ADE-DRS) is compared with existing research
techniques namely KNN and Probabilistic Soft Logic Technique (PSLT). Here KNN algorithm is used to predict the drug
effect knowledge by computing the similarity between the
input sample and the training sample. PSLT method would
classify the drug adversary effect database by calculating the
probability of disease occurrence and their corresponding
drug effects. The performance of the proposed methodology is compared and verified by using the metrics namely
accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and precision. The simulation outcomes obtained are given in the following Figs. 6, 7,
8, and 9.
The Figs. 6, 7, 8, and 9 shows simulation outcome obtained
in the matlab simulation environment. These figures indicate
the input data, input tweet comments and the processing of
feature extraction and feature selection and finally the outcome obtained. The proposed research method can predict
both positive and negative opinion efficiently. The comparison evaluation of the proposed research methods are given
below in detail:
Accuracy Accuracy is defined as the degree of correct identification of drug names present in the tweets without errors.
It can also be stated as reduced false positive rate. The calculation procedure of accuracy is given in the following Eq. (5).
Tp

Accuracy = 
Tp + Fp + Fn

(5)

Cluster Computing (2019) 22:S12827–S12837

S12833

Fig. 6 Input drug data set and input tweet

Fig. 7 Extracted text from the tweets and iteration cost
0.62

The above mentioned Fig. 10 proves the accuracy comparison performance in detail. From this comparison it can
be well proved that the proposed research technique ADEDRS leads to shows better prediction outcome which is 22%
better than PSLT and 25% better than the KNN.
Sensitivity Sensitivity is defined as the degree of positive
classification of correctly identified labels. The mathematical
calculation procedure of sensitivity metrics is defined in the
following Eq. (6).

0.6

Best Cost

0.58

0.56

0.54

0.52

Sensitivity
0.5

=
0.48

0

2

4

6

Fig. 8 Iteration cost obtained

8

10
Iteration

12

14

16

18

20

Number of true positives
Number of true positives + Number of false negatives

(6)
From the graphical comparison shown in Fig. 11, it is well
proved that the proposed research technique ADE-DRS out

123

S12834

Cluster Computing (2019) 22:S12827–S12837

Fig. 9 Final outcome obtained

Fig. 10 Accuracy comparison

100
KNN
PSLT
ADL-DRS

90
80

Accuracy(%)

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Number of Images

performs the other research methods in terms of accurate
positive identification. This graphs shows that the proposed
research method is better than the existing research methods.
ADE-DRS is 66% better than PSLT, 78% better than KNN.
Specificity Specificity is defined as incorrect classification of
non drug data items present in the database as drug items. The
mathematical calculation procedure of the specificity terms
is given in following Eq. (7):

methods. ADE-DRS is 16% better than PSLT, 31% better
than KNN.
Precision It is the fraction of retrieved instances that are
relevant which is given in following Eq. (8):
Precision
|{relevant documents} ∩ {retrieved documents}|
=
|{retrieved documents}|
(8)

Specificity
=

Number of true negatives
Number of true negatives + Number of false positives

(7)
The Fig. 12 illustrates the specificity metric comparison
graphical representation. This graphs shows that the proposed research method is better than the existing research

123

The Fig. 13 illustrates the precision metric comparison
graphical representation. This graphs shows that the proposed research method is better than the existing research
methods. ADE-DRS is 51% better than PSLT, 70% better
than KNN.
Recall Recall is defined as the amount of relevant drug factors identified from the database of tweets. The graphical
comparison of recall is given in the following Fig. 14.

Cluster Computing (2019) 22:S12827–S12837

S12835

Fig. 11 Sensitivity comparison

100
KNN
PSLT
ADL-DRS

90
80

Sensitivity(%)

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Methods
Fig. 12 Specificity comparison

100
KNN
PSLT
ADL-DRS

90
80

Specificity(%)

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Methods

The Fig. 14 illustrates the recall metric comparison graphical representation. This graphs shows that the proposed
research method is better than the existing research methods. ADE-DRS is 67% better than PSLT, 79% better than
KNN.

5 Conclusion
Adverse drug effects is the most common problem found in
real world scenario which cause major impacts on human
beings in case of wrong dosage taken. These adverse drug
reactions needs to be identified accurately in order to avoid
the major impacts occurred on human beings. This research
work focus on the online reviews about the drug reaction
which is gathered from the twitter social media website.

123

S12836

Cluster Computing (2019) 22:S12827–S12837

Fig. 13 Precision comparison

100
KNN
PSLT
ADL-DRS

90
80

Precision(%)

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Number of Images
Fig. 14 Recall comparison

100
KNN
PSLT
ADL-DRS

90
80

Recall(%)

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Number of Images

These reviews are analyzed to find the reaction of users
in terms of positive reaction or negative reaction based on
adverse effects. In this work training is done on the tweet
data corpus downloaded from online to learn the negative and
positive impact words. Initially preprocessing is done on the
retrieved data reviews to eliminate unwanted words and result
with only required data contents without noises and repeated
data by using successor variety stemmer’s (SVS) algorithm.
After preprocessing, optimal feature selection is done on the

123

preprocessed terms to select the most optimal terms that represent the drug reactions by using hybrid Generic Particle
Swarm Optimization algorithm (HGA-PSO). Finally classification is done by using ITSVM. The overall evaluation of
the proposed research methodology is conducted in the matlab simulation environment from which it is proved that the
proposed research method leads to provide optimal outcome
than the existing research methodologies in terms of optimal
prediction accuracy rate.

Cluster Computing (2019) 22:S12827–S12837

References
1. Anson, E., Thompson, E., Odle, B.L., Jeka, J., Walls, Z.F., Panus,
P.C.: Influences of age, obesity, and adverse drug effects on balance
and mobility testing scores in ambulatory older adults. J. Geriatr.
Phys. Therapy (2001) (2017)
2. Aronson, J.K.: Distinguishing hazards and harms, adverse drug
effects and adverse drug reactions: implications for drug development, clinical trials, pharma covigilance, biomarkers, and monitoring. Drug Saf. 36(3), 147 (2013)
3. Alomar, M.J.: Factors affecting the development of adverse drug
reactions. Saudi Pharm. J. 22(2), 83–94 (2014)
4. Huybrechts, K.F., Desai, R.J., Park, M., Gagne, J.J., Najafzadeh,
M., Avorn, J.: The potential return on public investment in detecting
adverse drug effects. Medical Care 55(6), 545–551 (2017)
5. Pharm, P.C.P., Hall, C.D., Pharm, Z.F.W.: Influences of age, obesity,
and adverse drug effects on gait speed in community-dwelling older
adults (2017)
6. Miller, R., Melius, J., Nunes, N., Willighagen, E. L., Woollard,
P., Evelo, C.T.: Finding drugs with common downstream effects,
using direction information in biological pathways. In: SWAT4LS
(2016)
7. Hazell, L., Cornelius, V., Hannaford, P., Shakir, S., Avery, A.J.:
How do patients contribute to signal detection?: a retrospective
analysis of spontaneous reporting of adverse drug reactions in the
UK’s Yellow Card Scheme. Drug Saf. 36(3), 199 (2013)
8. Drummond, D.C.: Dependence on psychoactive drugs: finding
a common. In: Glass, I.B. (ed.) The International Handbook of
Addiction Behaviour. Routledge, London (2016)
9. Gao, M., Igata, H., Takeuchi, A., Sato, K., Ikegaya, Y.: Machine
learning-based prediction of adverse drug effects: an example of
seizure-inducing compounds. J. Pharmacol. Sci. 133(2), 70–78
(2017)
10. Katragadda, S., Karnati, H., Pusala, M., Raghavan, V., Benton, R.:
Detecting adverse drug effects using link classification on twitter data. In: IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and
Biomedicine (BIBM), Washington, DC, pp. 675–679 (2015)
11. Duan, L., Khoshneshin, M., Street, W.N., Liu, M.: Adverse drug
effect detection. IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 17(2), 305–311
(2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/TITB.2012.2227272
12. Dipali and Yogita.: Data mining as a tool for detecting adverse
effects of drugs. In: International Conference on Computing, Communication and Automation (ICCCA), Noida, 2016, pp. 188–192.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CCAA.2016.7813715
13. Sampathkumar, H., Luo, B., Chen, X.W.: Mining adverse drug sideeffects from online medical forums. In: IEEE Second International
Conference on Healthcare Informatics, Imaging and Systems Biology, San Diego, CA, pp. 150–150 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1109/
HISB.2012.75
14. Liu, X., Chen, H.: Identifying adverse drug events from patient
social media: a case study for diabetes. IEEE Intell. Syst. 30(3),
44–51 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2015.7
15. Fakhraei, S., Huang, B., Raschid, L., Getoor, L.: Network-based
drug-target interaction prediction with probabilistic soft logic.
IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinform. 11(5), 775–787
(2014). https://doi.org/10.1109/TCBB.2014.2325031
16. Giannetto, D., Harris, A., Mayo, K., Smith, M., Patel, S.: A systems
approach to improving medication reconciliation in an academic
medical center. In: Systems and Information Engineering Design
Symposium, Charlottesville, VA, pp. 312–317 (2015). https://doi.
org/10.1109/SIEDS.2015.7116996
17. Zhang, J., Huan, J.: Predicting drug-induced QT prolongation
effects using multi-view learning. IEEE Trans. NanoBiosci. 12(3),
206–213 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/TNB.2013.2263511

S12837
18. Xiang, Y.P., et al.: Rapid assessment of adverse drug reactions by
statistical solution of gene association network. IEEE/ACM Trans.
Comput. Biol. Bioinform. 12(4), 844–850 (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1109/TNB.2013.2263511
19. Cai, Z., Yan, H., Li, P., Huang, Z.A., Gao, C.: Towards secure and
flexible EHR sharing in mobile health cloud under static assumptions. Clust. Comput. 1–8 (2017)
20. Al Alkeem, E., Shehada, D., Yeun, C.Y., Zemerly, M.J., Hu, J.: New
secure healthcare system using cloud of things. Clust. Comput. 1–
19 (2017)

S. Nalini currently working as a
Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Velammal Institute
of Technology, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India. She received M.E.
(CSE) in Vinayaka Missions University, Salem and secured Silver Medal. She is pursuing Ph.D.
in Anna University, Chennai. She
has published more papers in
referred journals and international
conference proceedings. She has
guided more than 25 undergraduate and 10 post graduate students.
She has acted as co-investigator in many funding agencies like CSIR,
DST, DRDO and organized many workshops, symposiums and technical events for the benefit of students. Her main areas of research
includes Data mining. She has worked on Social Network Analysis,
Opinion mining and Big Data.

P. Balasubramanie currently working as a Professor in the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Kongu Engineering
College, Tamilnadu, India. He is
one of the approved supervisor
of Anna University Chennai and
guided 26 Ph.D. scholars. Currently he is guiding 10 Ph.D. scholars. He has published 203 articles in national/international journals. He has published 11 books
with the reputed publishers. Three
of the books published are used
as text/reference books by many
of the leading universities in India. He has completed one AICTE
research promotion scheme (RPS) as a Principal Investigator. Currently he is working in a UGC minor research project as a principal investigator. He has received 13 lakhs grant from various funding
agencies like AICTE, CSIR, DRDO, NBHM, ICMR and so on and
organized 21 SDP/STTP/Seminar/workshops for the benefit of faculty
members and research scholars. So far he has received 14 awards. He
is actively involved in training and consultancy activities. His field of
specialization includes Cloud Computing, Data Mining and Networking.

123

