Drug Saf (2015) 38:207–217
DOI 10.1007/s40264-015-0265-0

ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE

Pediatric Drug Safety Signal Detection: A New Drug–Event
Reference Set for Performance Testing of Data-Mining Methods
and Systems
Osemeke U. Osokogu • Federica Fregonese • Carmen Ferrajolo • Katia Verhamme • Sandra de Bie
Geert ’t Jong • Mariana Catapano • Daniel Weibel • Florentia Kaguelidou • Wichor M. Bramer •
Yingfen Hsia • Ian C. K. Wong • Madlen Gazarian • Jan Bonhoeffer • Miriam Sturkenboom

•

Published online: 8 February 2015
Ó The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract
Background Better evidence regarding drug safety in the
pediatric population might be generated from existing data
sources such as spontaneous reporting systems and electronic healthcare records. The Global Research in Paediatrics (GRiP)–Network of Excellence aims to develop
pediatric-specific methods that can be applied to these data
sources. A reference set of positive and negative drug–
event associations is required.

Key Points
A pediatric-specific reference set of positive and
negative drug–event associations was created.
The reference set may be utilized in evaluating
various data-mining methods, and databases.
It is important to determine locally, when the
positive associations became known, as this may
impact methods’ and database performance.

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this
article (doi:10.1007/s40264-015-0265-0) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
On behalf of the Global Research in Paediatrics (GRiP)–Network of
Excellence.
O. U. Osokogu (&)  C. Ferrajolo  K. Verhamme  S. de Bie 
G. Jong  D. Weibel  F. Kaguelidou  M. Sturkenboom
Department of Medical Informatics, Erasmus University
Medical Center, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam,
The Netherlands
e-mail: o.osokogu@erasmusmc.nl
F. Fregonese
Azienda Ospedaliera di Padova, University of Padua,
Padua, Italy
F. Fregonese
CRCHUM, Université de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada
C. Ferrajolo
Pharmacology Division, Department of Experimental Medicine,
Campania Regional Centre of Pharmacovigilance and
Pharmacoepidemiology, Second University of Naples,
Naples, Italy
G. Jong
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada

Objective The aim of this study was to develop a pediatric-specific reference set of positive and negative drug–
event associations.
M. Catapano
Gruppo Italiano per gli Studi di Farmacoeconomia (GISF),
Pavia, Italy
W. M. Bramer
Medical Library, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Y. Hsia  I. C. K. Wong
Department of Practice and Policy, Centre of Paediatric
Pharmacy Research, UCL School of Pharmacy, London, UK
Y. Hsia
Paediatric Infectious Diseases Research Group,
St. Georges University of London, London, UK
I. C. K. Wong
Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Centre for Safe
Medication Practice and Research, University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China

208

Methods Considering user patterns and expert opinion,
16 drugs that are used in individuals aged 0–18 years were
selected and evaluated against 16 events, regarded as important safety outcomes. A cross-table of unique drug–
event pairs was created. Each pair was classified as potential positive or negative control based on information
from the drug’s Summary of Product Characteristics and
Micromedex. If both information sources consistently
listed the event as an adverse event, the combination was
reviewed as potential positive control. If both did not, the
combination was evaluated as potential negative control.
Further evaluation was based on published literature.
Results Selected drugs include ibuprofen, flucloxacillin,
domperidone, methylphenidate, montelukast, quinine, and
cyproterone/ethinylestradiol. Selected events include bullous
eruption, aplastic anemia, ventricular arrhythmia, sudden
death, acute kidney injury, psychosis, and seizure. Altogether, 256 unique combinations were reviewed, yielding 37
positive (17 with evidence from the pediatric population and
20 with evidence from adults only) and 90 negative control
pairs, with the remainder being unclassifiable.
Conclusion We propose a drug–event reference set that
can be used to compare different signal detection methods
in the pediatric population.

1 Introduction
In the last 50 years, drug safety monitoring has developed
rapidly in terms of increasing interest, broadening capacity,
innovation of methods and availability of data [1–3]. This
evolution has focused more on the adult population than
the pediatric age group (individuals aged 0–18 years).
However, drug safety monitoring in pediatrics is of particular importance because we continue to observe that
many drugs are prescribed unlicensed and there is lack of
adequate information on safety issues affecting this age
group. This is of particular concern as the impact of
adverse events during growth and maturation may be more
serious and longer term compared with adults [4–8].
Globally, specific regulations are being implemented to
generate better evidence on safety and efficacy in the

M. Gazarian
School of Medical Sciences, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, NSW, Australia
J. Bonhoeffer
Department of Paediatric Infectious Diseases and Vaccines,
University Children’s Hospital, Basel, Switzerland
J. Bonhoeffer
Brighton Collaboration Foundation, Basel, Switzerland

O. U. Osokogu et al.

pediatric population, but mostly by clinical trials [9, 10].
Although useful for efficacy, such trials are usually too
small and with too short a follow-up to yield adequate
information on rare adverse drug reactions (ADR) and
long-term safety [11]. Therefore, other and preferably
existing data sources should be utilized to provide information on the safety of drugs in pediatrics [12]. Existing
sources with lots of data comprise spontaneous reporting
system (SRS) and electronic healthcare record (EHR)
databases.
Although analysis of spontaneous reports is currently the
most commonly used method for identifying safety signals,
specific approaches to surveillance of the pediatric population are limited. The Council for International Organizations
of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) Working Group VIII recently
advocated for an increased pediatric focus in signal detection [13]. CIOMS also suggested methods to control for
confounding in vaccines safety assessment, an issue specific
to the pediatric population, and de Bie et al. [14] proposed
further refinement of these methods.
Safety signal detection using SRS databases may be
complemented by mining longitudinal data in EHRs, as
described by the European Adverse Drug Reaction (EUADR) project—‘Exploring and Understanding Adverse
Drug Reactions by Integrative Mining of Clinical Records
and Biomedical Knowledge’ and the ‘Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership’ (OMOP) project [15–17].
Although newly developed methods, i.e. Longitudinal
Gamma Poisson Shrinker (LGPS), show promising results
in pediatric data [18], more extensive and systematic testing is needed.
The Global Research in Paediatrics (GRiP)–Network of
excellence (http://www.grip-network.org/) was set up with
the general objective of facilitating the development and
safe use of medicines in the pediatric population, with a
specific objective being to apply innovative approaches and
standardized methodologies, as well as better utilization of
existing healthcare and spontaneous reporting databases.
GRiP aims to tailor existing signal detection methods to
pediatric safety data. Comparison of the performance of
existing methods within and across SRS and EHR
databases is the first step in defining suitable methods to be
implemented. For this purpose, creation of a reference set
comprising pediatric-specific drug–event pairs serving as
positive and negative control, is required to calculate
baseline performance statistics. Coloma et al. [19] recently
described the methodology for creating a reference set used
to test methods in the EU-ADR project. Similarly, Ryan
et al. [20] established a reference set for testing methods in
the OMOP project. However, both were not specific to the
pediatric population and comprise many drugs infrequently
prescribed within this age group, and events that rarely (or
never) affect them.

Reference Set for Pediatric Drug Safety Signal Detection

In this study we describe how we created a proposed
reference set for comparing the performance of different
methods in detecting drug safety signals in the pediatric
population. This may be used for spontaneous reporting, as
well as electronic healthcare record databases.

2 Methods
The first step in creating the reference set was to select a
list of eligible drugs to be utilized. Based on four criteria,
four (primary) lists of drugs were created: we compiled
drugs that are frequently prescribed in pediatrics (including
off-label use), on an outpatient basis in high-income
countries (as per papers and reports of use) [21, 22]; to
allow for inpatient databases to be assessed, we included
drugs that are administered to hospitalized persons aged
0–18 years (or administered by specialists) [22]; to allow
for databases from low- and middle-income countries
(LMICs) to be assessed, we included drugs that are used in
such countries [as per the World Health Organization
(WHO) List of Essential Medicines for children] [23]; and
to allow for testing signal detection performance by different age groups, we included drugs that are used in
specific pediatric age groups (for example, adolescents)
[22].
To obtain a final drug list, a stepwise procedure was
implemented. First, if two or more drugs [fifth-level chemical substances, WHO Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical
(ATC) Classification System] belonged to the same class
(‘WHO-ATC, fourth level’), and were listed in an equal
number of primary lists ([1), we preferentially selected
only the drug that had the oldest initial marketing authorization worldwide. This was done to have the most evidence available. For example, doxycycline (WHO-ATC
code J01AA02) would be selected instead of minocycline
(WHO-ATC code J01AA08) because although they both
belong to the same class—‘WHO-ATC, fourth level’
(tetracyclines)—doxycycline was first marketed in 1967
[24], and minocycline in 1972 [25]. Second, we preferentially selected drugs that appeared in most of the lists, for
example a drug appearing on three of four primary lists
would be retained instead of another drug appearing on
only two lists. The final list comprised more than 30 drugs,
which was beyond our capacity and resources and was
reduced to 16 for pragmatic reasons.
Events were chosen (independent of the drugs) with the
aim of generating a set which may be used for methods
development on spontaneous reporting as well as EHRs.
Both rare and common events were included to allow for
investigation of effect modification. Starting with common
adverse events observed in pediatrics, as reported by Star
et al. [26], we selected only events that were deemed

209

serious (as per the WHO definition [27]) and specific (to
avoid misclassification). For example aplastic anemia was
selected rather than anemia as the former connotes a more
serious and specific medical condition. Some events (i.e.
psychosis and seizure) were included by consensus in the
research team because they were considered relevant for
the pediatric population from a pharmacovigilance and
public health point of view. Fifteen drugs and events were
considered as the minimum required for generating enough
positive and negative associations. Finally, the total number of drugs and events was set at 16 for pragmatic reasons.
Four researchers (MS, IW, JB, and GJ) with a range of
expertise spanning pediatrics, pharmacology, and pharmacoepidemiology determined the final list of selected drugs
and events. MS and IW are pharmacists/pharmacoepidemiologists, JB is a pediatrician, and GJ is a pediatrician/clinical pharmacologist/pharmacoepidemiologist.
All events of interest were defined using standard
resources (i.e. medical textbooks, uptodate.com, and scientific societies such as the CIOMS) to increase the likelihood of comprehensive literature searches. The final
reference set was generated by cross-tabulating the final
lists of drugs and events, which led to a matrix of 256
unique drug–event pairs. In order to classify each unique
drug–event pair as a ‘positive’, ‘negative’, or ‘unclassifiable’ association, evidence was reviewed in two sequential
steps.
2.1 Review of Summary of Product Characteristics
(SPC) and Micromedex
First, two researchers (OO and CF) with expertise in general
medicine, pharmacy, and pharmacoepidemiology reviewed
the SPC of each drug to ascertain that a specific event (for
example, aplastic anemia) was listed as a possible adverse
event under the appropriate section(s)—‘Undesirable
effects’ (section 4.8) and/or ‘Special warnings and
precautions for use’ (section 4.4) from the electronic
Medicines Compendium (eMC) [28]. DailyMed (the ‘Contraindications, Warnings, Precautions’ and/or ‘Adverse
Reactions’ sections) was consulted only if a drug was not
listed in the eMC [29]. The eMC contains more than 9,000
up-to-date, freely accessible documents containing information about medicines licensed for use in the UK. Prior to
publishing, these documents are usually checked and
approved by either the UK Medicines and Healthcare
products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) or the European
Medicines Agency (EMA). DailyMed, published by the
National Library of Medicine (NLM) in the US, contains
up-to-date information about drugs licensed for use in the
US. Both eMC and DailyMed are freely accessible online.
Second, two researchers (OO and CF) reviewed
Micromedex to check if the event was listed under the

210

O. U. Osokogu et al.

16 drugs

256 unique drug-event
pairs

16 events

check SPC and
Micromedex
yes/yes

no/no
yes/no

consider for POSITIVE
CONTROL 95#

no/yes

discard as
‘unclassifiable’

consider for NEGATIVE
CONTROL 127#

query medline and
embase.com (17685 hits)
sufficient
evidence

evidence discordant with
SPC/Micromedex

confirm as POSITIVE
CONTROL 37#

no evidence

confirm as NEGATIVE
CONTROL 90#
discard as
‘unclassifiable’ 95#

FINAL REFERENCE SET 127#

Fig. 1 Procedure adopted for the construction of the reference set (adapted from Coloma et al. [19]). SPC Summary of Product Characteristics,
#
drug–event pairs

section ‘Adverse Reactions’ within the Drugdex component. Micromedex is an online drug information system
that contains referenced information from various sources
needed for clinical decision making, including adverse
effects of drugs (http://www.micromedex.com/).
After reviewing the SPC and Micromedex, drug–event
pairs were classified as (1) ‘potential positive control’
(event was mentioned in both the SPC and Micromedex);
(2) ‘potential negative control’ (event was mentioned in
neither the SPC nor Micromedex); or (3) unclassifiable
(discordant information between the SPC and Micromedex). ‘Potential positive control’ and ‘potential negative
control’ pairs were retained and the relationship of each
drug–event pair was further evaluated using published literature (Fig. 1).
2.2 Review of Published Literature
For each drug–event pair that was classified as a ‘potential
negative control’, a systematic literature search was conducted in EMBASE.COM and MEDLINE (via OvidSP).
The sensitive search algorithm applied to both title and
abstract comprised controlled vocabulary plus free text for
each of two concepts: ‘event of interest’ and drug.

For each ‘potential positive control’, the search algorithm was more specific (to avoid large numbers of papers)
than for the potential negative controls, and included only
controlled vocabulary for the drug name. However, the
event was searched by using both controlled vocabulary
and free text. In addition, controlled vocabulary was
included for the concept ‘general adverse drug reaction’;
this was done to increase the probability of retrieving only
those articles where adverse event and drug co-occurred in
the context of drug safety [19].
For potential negative and positive control pairs we only
considered articles published in English. Publications could
be biological and/or epidemiological studies. Epidemiological studies could be case reports, observational
studies (i.e. cohort, case-control), reviews, meta-analysis,
and clinical trials. As an example, the search strings for the
negative control sudden death–cyproterone/ethinylestradiol, and positive control sudden death–clarithromycin are
presented in Appendix 1 of the electronic supplementary
material (ESM).
One of five researchers (OO, CF, FF, MC, and YH)
reviewed retrieved publications pertaining to a unique
drug–event pair. All five researchers have received medical, biological, and/or pharmacology training. Based on

V
Negative control
(NC)

IV

III
Indeterminate

SPC Summary of product characteristics

Proven against causal
association
Plausible against causal
association

Plausible for causal association

(Included in SPC/Micromedex) AND [Evidence from at least one
observational study (i.e. cohort, case-control, case-crossover, selfcontrolled case series) OR review of spontaneous reports OR
systematic review OR (at least three published case reports from
different sources and concerning different patients with causality
evaluation of definite or probable)]
(Included in SPC/Micromedex) AND (Evidence from less than three
published case reports and no further substantiation in the literature)
Included in SPC/Micromedex BUT no published case reports or
studies
(Not mentioned in SPC/Micromedex) AND (published evidence
against causal association OR no published evidence supporting
causal association)
II

Plausible for causal association
Proven for causal association

NC2

NC1

Evidence from at least one publication
explaining the mechanistic pathway
No published evidence

PC2

PC2
PC1

PC1

Evidence from at least one publication
explaining the mechanistic pathway
No published evidence
Evidence from at least one publication
explaining the mechanistic pathway
No published evidence
(Included in SPC/Micromedex) AND (Evidence from at least one
randomized controlled trial or meta-analysis)
I
Positive
control (PC)

Proven for causal association

Description
Biological mechanism
Description
Level of
evidence

As presented in Table 2, 16 drugs (unique WHOATC codes, fifth-level chemical substance) were selected
for the reference set, comprising eight anti-infectives: flucloxacillin, clarithromycin, doxycycline, lopinavir (which
is always administered in fixed-dose combination with
ritonavir), isoniazid, praziquantel, mebendazole, and quinine. The remaining were respiratory drugs (fluticasone,
administered as an inhalant, and montelukast), gastrointestinal drugs (loperamide and domperidone), antipyretic/analgesic (ibuprofen), a drug for attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder (methylphenidate), anti-acne

Classification

3 Results

Table 1 Evaluation and grading of unique drug–event pairs based on SPC/Micromedex and literature evidence

data extracted from relevant publications, unique drug–
event pairs were classified according to the criteria outlined
in Table 1. For example, a pair was assigned level I evidence if there was evidence from at least one randomized
controlled trial or meta-analysis, while ‘positive control,
grade 1’ (PC1) meant that in addition there was ‘proven
biological mechanism for causal association’. Level V
evidence—(not mentioned in the SPC/Micromedex) AND
(published evidence against causal association; OR no
published evidence supporting causal association)—qualified a specific drug–event pair as a negative control, while
‘negative control, grade 1’ (NC1) meant that in addition
there was ‘proven biological mechanism against causal
association’. ‘Proven biological mechanism’ meant that
there was at least one publication providing relevant biological evidence regarding a unique drug–event pair.
Two researchers (MS and FK; a pediatrician, clinical
pharmacologist, and pharmacoepidemiologist) reviewed all
associations that were classified as positive or negative
control.
Whereas confirmation of negative control pairs required
lack of association for either adults or the pediatric age
group, positive control pairs were specifically assessed for
availability of evidence pertaining to persons aged 0–18
years. However, such evidence was not mandatory for
classification as positive control due to the acknowledged
lack of pediatric-specific studies [30]. Those with lack of
evidence in pediatrics are listed separately.
To further illustrate the process of reviewing the published literature, 126 unique references were retrieved
following database search for articles supporting the potential positive control sudden death–clarithromycin. Of
these, 103 articles were excluded following title/abstract
screening, while 13 articles were excluded following fulltext screening. Full-text copies of six articles could not be
obtained. Finally, four articles––one clinical trial, two
case-control studies, and one case report––presented sufficient evidence to support the association.

211
Grade

Reference Set for Pediatric Drug Safety Signal Detection

212

O. U. Osokogu et al.

Table 2 Classification of each drug–event pair as positive control (green: PC1 or PC2) or negative control (red: NC2)

Selected Drugs

Bullous
eruption

Aplastic
anemia

Agranulo
cytosis

Thromboc
ytopenia

Psychosis

Suicide

Vent.
arrhythmia

Selected Adverse Events
QT
Sudden
prolondeath
gation

Venous
thromboembolism

Anaphyl
axis

Seizure

Acute
kidney
injury

Acute
liver
injury

Sepsis

SIDS

flucloxacillin
clarithromycin
doxycycline
lopinavir
isoniazid
praziquantel
mebendazole
quinine
fluticasone
montelukast
isotretinoin
loperamide
domperidone
methylphenidate
ibuprofen
cyproterone
/eth.est.

Abbreviations: Vent. - ventricular; SIDS - Sudden Infant Death Syndrome; eth.est.- ethinylestradiol

(isotretinoin), and a hormonal oral contraceptive (cyproterone/ethinylestradiol).
We selected 16 events for the reference set—bullous
eruption [comprising fixed drug eruption (FDE), erythema
multiforme (EM), Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS), and
toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN)], aplastic anemia,
agranulocytosis, thrombocytopenia, psychosis, suicide,
ventricular arrhythmia, sudden death, QT prolongation,
venous thromboembolism, anaphylaxis, seizure, acute
kidney injury (AKI), acute liver injury (ALI), sepsis, and
sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) (Table 2). Medical
definitions for all events and their proposed (unvalidated)
Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA)
codes are presented in Appendix 2 of the ESM.
From the total number of combinations (256), we discontinued assessment of 34 unclassifiable drug–event pairs
since we found discrepant information between the SPC
and Micromedex. For the remaining 222 pairs, the literature search generated 17,685 hits. Based on review of
these hits, 127 pairs were confirmed as positive control (37
pairs) or negative control (90 pairs) (Tables 2, 3); for 95
‘unclassifiable’ pairs there was discrepant information
between the published literature on one hand and the SPC
and Micromedex on the other hand.
In confirming the 37 positive controls, evidence was used
from 171 relevant publications, comprising 14 biological
studies, 10 clinical trials, 23 observational studies, 34
reviews, and 90 case reports/series. The association between

quinine and thrombocytopenia had the highest number of
supporting publications, i.e. 20 (of 171); eight publications
pertained to biological evidence, while 12 reported on epidemiologic evidence. Table 4 shows how the positive controls (quinine–thrombocytopenia and clarithromycin–
sudden death) were established. For complete evaluation of
all positive controls, see Appendix 3 of the ESM.
As presented in Table 3, we generated 37 positive
controls; of these, level I evidence was available for only 8
(22 %), and 13 (35 %) were supported by both biological
and epidemiological evidence. Only four associations
(clarithromycin–thrombocytopenia, montelukast–psychosis,
montelukast–suicide AND methylphenidate–psychosis)
were supported by evidence generated exclusively from the
pediatric age group, while 13 associations were supported
by evidence from both adults and the pediatric population. Overall, 17 (46 %) of all positive associations
were based on evidence from the pediatric population.
Twenty associations were supported by evidence from only
adults.
As presented in Appendix 4 of the ESM, we compared
the reference set we created with the reference sets that
were created within EU-ADR and OMOP. Of the 16 drugs
that were selected for GRiP, four were also included in EUADR and/or OMOP: fluticasone, ibuprofen, isoniazid, and
mebendazole. Ibuprofen was classified to be a positive
control for AKI in each of the three reference sets, while
the same drug was classified to be associated with ALI only

Reference Set for Pediatric Drug Safety Signal Detection

213

Table 3 Level of epidemiological and biological evidence; population in which association was found (adults, ‘children’a, or both) and grading
of positive drug–event associations
Event

Positive associations
ATC code

Bullous eruptionb

Drug name

Level of
epidemiological
evidencec

Population
(A/B/C)d

Biological
evidence (Pr/Pl)

Gradee

J01FA09

Clarithromycin

II

B

Pl

PC2

J01CF05

Doxycycline

II

B

Pl

PC2

J04AC01

Isoniazid

II

B

Pl

PC2

P01BC01

Quinine

II

A

Pl

PC2

M01AE01

Ibuprofen

II

B

Pl

PC2

Aplastic anemia

P01BC01

Quinine

II

A

Pr

PC1

Agranulocytosis

P02CA01

Mebendazole

II

A

Pl

PC2

P01BC01

Quinine

II

A

Pr

PC1

J01FA09

Clarithromycin

II

C

Pl

PC2

J01CF05
P01BC01

Doxycycline
Quinine

I
II

A
A

Pl
Pr

PC2
PC1

M01AE01

Ibuprofen

I

A

Pl

PC2

J01FA09

Clarithromycin

II

A

Pl

PC2

J04AC01

Isoniazid

II

A

Pl

PC2

R03DC03

Montelukast

II

C

Pl

PC2

D10BA01

Isotretinoin

II

B

Pr

PC1

N06BA04

Methylphenidate

I

C

Pr

PC1

R03DC03

Montelukast

II

C

Pl

PC2

D10BA01

Isotretinoin

II

B

Pr

PC1

Thrombocytopenia

Psychosis

Suicide
Ventricular arrhythmia

J01FA09

Clarithromycin

II

A

Pl

PC2

P01BC01

Quinine

II

A

Pl

PC2

A03FA03

Domperidone

II

A

Pr

PC1

J01FA09

Clarithromycin

I

A

Pl

PC2

A03FA03

Domperidone

II

A

Pr

PC1

QT prolongation

J01FA09
P01BC01

Clarithromycin
Quinine

II
I

A
B

Pr
Pr

PC1
PC1

Anaphylaxis

M01AE01

Ibuprofen

II

B

Pr

PC1

Sudden death

Seizure

J04AC01

Isoniazid

II

B

Pr

PC1

Acute kidney injury

P01BC01

Quinine

II

A

Pl

PC2

M01AE01

Ibuprofen

II

B

Pr

PC1

J01CF05

Flucloxacillin

II

A

Pl

PC2

J01FA09

Clarithromycin

II

B

Pl

PC2

J05AE06

Lopinavir

I

A

Pl

PC2

J04AC01

Isoniazid

I

B

Pl

PC2

P02CA01

Mebendazole

I

B

Pl

PC2

P01BC01

Quinine

II

A

Pl

PC2

M01AE01

Ibuprofen

II

A

Pl

PC2

Acute liver injury

ATC Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical, Pr proven biological evidence, Pl plausible biological evidence, PC positive control
a

In this context ‘Children’ refers to individuals aged 0–18 years

b

Epidemiological evidence levels I and II are defined in Table 1

c

Population in which epidemiological evidence was found: A, adults; B, both adults and ‘children’; C, ‘children’

d

As defined in Table 1

e

Bullous eruption includes fixed drug eruption, erythema multiforme, Stevens–Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis

214

O. U. Osokogu et al.

Table 4 Examples of evaluation of a positive drug–event association: (1) quinine–thrombocytopenia and (2) clarithromycin–sudden death
ATC code

Drug name

Event type

Labeled as AE in SPC (yes/no)

Type/no. of supporting
literature citations

P01BC01

Quinine

Thrombocytopenia

Yes

Total number of supporting
citations = 20

*eMC (special warnings and precautions
for use; undesirable effects)
#

Micromedex (summary): black-box
warning; (contraindications/
warnings ? contraindications;
precautions); (adverse effects ? serious)

Biological studies = 8
Review of biological studies = 4
Systematic review = 1
Case-series = 1
Case reports = 4
Review of spontaneous reports = 2

J01FA09

Clarithromycin

Sudden death

Yes
*eMC (undesirable effects)
#

Micromedex (summary):
(contraindications/warnings ?
precautions); (adverse effects ? serious)

Total number of supporting
citations = 4
Clinical trial = 1
Case-control = 2
Case report = 1

ATC Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical, AE adverse effect, SPC Summary of Product Characteristics, eMC electronic Medicines Compendium
* https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/
#

http://micromedex.com/

within GRiP and EU-ADR. Isoniazid was classified as
positive control for ALI, both in GRiP and OMOP. Neither
OMOP nor EU-ADR labeled mebendazole with AKI, nor
fluticasone with ALI.

4 Discussion
We describe a pediatric-focused reference set of drug–
event associations that may be used for testing the performance of different signal detection methods and
databases. To our knowledge, this is the first structured
approach to creating a reference set that is specific to
pediatric safety outcomes. This approach yielded 37 positive and 90 negative drug–event associations; 17 positive
associations were supported by evidence in pediatric age
group, and 20 were based on adult information only.
Projects such as OMOP and EU-ADR have also created
reference sets but none was targeted to pediatrics; in
addition, the construct of these reference sets was different
[19, 31–33]. In the current project, drugs and events were
selected independently, unlike EU-ADR and OMOP [19,
20]. In addition, the EU-ADR network restricted the list of
drugs based on the amount of drug exposure that would be
required to identify associations with selected adverse
events at pre-specified relative risk (RR) values. This was
done so that such drug–event associations could actually be
identified if indeed they occurred within the network.
Similar calculations were not done for the current project,
although most of the selected drugs are frequently administered in the pediatric population (based on reported evidence in the literature). Furthermore, the reference set

resulting from the current project will be applied to SRS
databases (in addition to EHRs) and therefore should
preferably be unbiased to one or the other.
The GRiP reference set focused on diversity of drugs
and events which may allow us to stratify by outpatient/
inpatient care, and frequent and rare events. Sets with drugs
for inpatient use may favour performance of data mining
on SRS databases, while sets utilizing drugs prescribed for
outpatient treatments may favour mining performance on
EHR databases [34]. In order to have enough power for
both, we focused on drugs with longer license status.
In selecting adverse events, we considered both frequent
and rare events. Thus, the resulting reference set can be
tested in a wide variety of databases with unique adverse
event profiles, such as SRSs, and hospital-based and general practice healthcare databases. Previous reference sets
focused mostly on rare and well-known drug-induced
events which may favour SRSs [19]. Such events may be
reported more often than common, multifactorial events
because they are easier to identify as being caused by
drugs. Given that the composition of the lists of drugs and
adverse events to be tested may have an extensive impact
on performance assessment [35], we tried to ensure that the
criteria and data sources that were utilized to create the
reference set were independent of the data on which they
will eventually be tested.
We conducted extensive reviews to list evidence for
both positive and negative controls. Fewer publications
were retrieved for the potential positive control pairs (7,745
hits) compared with the potential negative control pairs
(9,940 hits), possibly because the search algorithm for the
former was more specific. However, this was considered

Reference Set for Pediatric Drug Safety Signal Detection

necessary to increase the probability of retrieving relevant
publications (i.e. publications that reported on adverse
event and drug in the context of drug safety), an approach
similar to that adopted by the EU-ADR project [19].
To validate potential negative control pairs, terms that
were related to the actual event term were considered. For
example suicide–isoniazid was initially classified as
potential negative control because suicide was not mentioned (in relation to isoniazid), both in the SPC (DailyMed)
and Micromedex. However, a case report described the
occurrence of suicide attempt following ingestion of
isoniazid [36]; therefore, this association could not be
confirmed as negative control. Whereas the negative drug–
event associations required lack of association for adults
or the pediatric population, the positive drug–event
associations were specifically (or primarily) assessed for
availability of evidence pertaining to the pediatric age
group. However, due to the general lack of pediatric
pharmacoepidemiological data, only four associations
(clarithromycin–thrombocytopenia, montelukast–psychosis,
montelukast–suicide AND methylphenidate–psychosis)
were supported by evidence generated exclusively from this
age group: a case-control study for clarithromycin–thrombocytopenia [37]; case reports (more than three) for montelukast–psychosis [38]; review of spontaneous reports for
montelukast–suicide [39]; and clinical trials as well as case
series for methylphenidate–psychosis [40]. The scarcity and
quality of pediatric-specific data further highlight the difficulties in generating safety evidence in the pediatric
population, thereby underlining the importance of developing a tool to define appropriate signal detection methods
in this population. We recommend that the 20 positive
associations that come from adult evidence only, be treated
separately in the performance testing in pediatric data.
We chose to classify all pairs with inconsistent evidence
as unclassifiable, to avoid misclassification. We searched
for biological (in addition to epidemiological) evidence to
further strengthen retrieved evidence for positive controls.
However, we were able to find such evidence for only 13 of
37 positive associations: quinine–aplastic anemia [41];
quinine–agranulocytosis [42]; quinine–thrombocytopenia
[43]; isotretinoin–psychosis [44, 45]; methylphenidate–
psychosis [46, 47]; isotretinion–suicide [44, 45]; domperidone–ventricular arrhythmia [48]; domperidone–sudden death [49]; clarithromycin–QT prolongation [50];
quinine–QT prolongation [51, 52]; ibuprofen–anaphylaxis
[53]; isoniazid–seizure [54]; and ibuprofen–AKI [55]. Of
these, quinine–thrombocytopenia had the highest number
of supporting publications, i.e. eight regarding biological
evidence (in addition to 12 others pertaining to epidemiological evidence). This is possibly because quinine
has been in use for a long time, both as over-the-counter
(OTC) and prescription drug [56]; therefore, its safety

215

profile has been well investigated. Otherwise, the limited
biological evidence for most of the other positive associations may reflect the current gap of knowledge and
understanding of ADRs.
Comparing our reference set with others, we found little
overlap in the choice of drugs, possibly because we aimed
to be pediatric-specific in our selection while also including
drugs used in specific subpopulations (i.e. adolescents) and
context (LMICs). Of 16 drugs considered in GRiP, only
four were also considered in EU-ADR and/or OMOP:
isoniazid, ibuprofen, mebendazole, and fluticasone. Perhaps this, as well as differences in adverse event selection,
explains the few similarities we found across the three
reference sets. Nevertheless, ibuprofen was found to be
associated with AKI in all sets.
There are several limitations in the creation and use of a
reference set. Some potential positive associations that are
well known (i.e. domperidone–QT prolongation and cyproterone/ethinylestradiol–venous thromboembolism, both of
which have been well investigated) could not be validated.
The search query we used to retrieve the publications may
have been too specific. For other unconfirmed potential
positive control pairs, events mentioned in the SPC and
Micromedex may have been reported through means other
than peer-reviewed literature (for example, US FDA reports).
Time is an important limiting aspect in building a reference set, both for the positive as well as negative controls. We labeled drug–event associations as negative if
there was lack of evidence, which in itself is something that
may rapidly change over time; checking of the absence of
evidence should always be carried out prior to using the
reference set. For the positive controls, it is important to
know at which point in time the association was ‘known’ as
this may lead to changes in reporting behaviour to spontaneous reporting databases and to changes in clinical care.
Those changes may have an impact on the ability to detect
associations (for example, in spontaneous reporting
databases it may increase the association, whereas it may
decrease in electronic healthcare databases) [57–59]. Time
stamping of the ‘known’ associations would be important.
However, this was impossible for this reference set since
we chose drugs that are available for a long time and have
been registered nationally. Inclusion of information in an
SPC may vary from country to country. We recommend
investigators who will use this set, to assess in their reality
when associations were ‘known’ in order to evaluate the
impact of that on performance.
In order to use the reference set, the events need to be
translated into codes. This is an important step and may
impact on the performance testing. In Appendix 2 of the
ESM we have provided initial MedDRA codes as most of
the events have Standardised MedDRA Queries (SMQs).
These codes should be reviewed and the impact of choices

216

should be carefully evaluated; they may differ between
spontaneous reporting databases and EHRs. Within the
GRiP project, we aim to perform this work for MedDRA,
International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision
(ICD-9), ICD, Tenth Revision (ICD-10), READ and
International Classification of Primary Care (ICPC), and a
full code list with the impact of choice on performance will
become available later.

5 Conclusions
We have generated a pediatric-focused reference set that
can be applied for testing performance of methods and
databases for drug safety signal detection in the pediatric
population. This reference set may be viewed as dynamic.
The status of drug–event associations may change over
time, particularly as more evidence derived specifically
from the pediatric population becomes available in the
future. Therefore, periodic review and checking against the
local situation is advisable.
Acknowledgments The Global Research in Pediatrics–Network of
Excellence is funded under the EU Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007–2013) under Grant agreement number 261060. Funding
for this study was also received from the ‘Priority Medicines Kinderen project ZONMW: Novel methods to assess and compare drug
effects in pediatrics’ (Grant agreement number 113201007). The
funders had no role whatsoever in designing and conducting the
study, the collection and management of data, and preparation,
review, or approval of the manuscript.
Miriam Sturkenboom leads a research unit that occasionally conducts research for pharmaceutical companies, including Novartis,
Boehringer, Lilly,and Pfizer. None of this work is related to these
activities. Katia Verhamme has received unconditional grants from
Pfizer/Boehringer Ingelheim, Yamanouchi, Novartis, and GlaxoSmithKline. None of these is related to the contents of this paper.
Osemeke U. Osokogu, Federica Fregonese, Carmen Ferrajolo, Sandra
de Bie, Geert ’t Jong, Mariana Catapano, Daniel Weibel, Florentia
Kaguelidou, Wichor M. Bramer, Yingfen Hsia, Ian C.K. Wong,
Madlen Gazarian, and Jan Bonhoeffer have no conflicts of interest
that are directly related to the content of this study.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.

References
1. Scurti V, Romero M, Tognoni G. A plea for a more epidemiological and patient-oriented pharmacovigilance. Eur J
Pharmacol. 2012;68(1):11–9.
2. Meyboom RHB. Pharmacovigilance in a changing world. Klinicka Farmakologie a Farmacie. 2011;25(3):102–11.
3. Van Grootheest K. The dawn of pharmacovigilance: an historical
perspective. Int J Pharmaceut Med. 2003;17(5–6):195–200.

O. U. Osokogu et al.
4. Vlahovic-Palcevski V, Mentzer D. Postmarketing surveillance.
Pediatric clinical pharmacology. Handbook of experimental
pharmacology, vol 205. Heidelberg: Springer; 2011. p. 339–51.
5. Autret-Leca E, Marchand MS, Cissoko H, Beau-Salinas F, Jonville-Bera AP. Pharmacovigilance in children (in French). Arch
Pediatr. 2012;19(8):848–55.
6. Phan H, Leder M, Fishley M, Moeller M, Nahata M. Off-label
and unlicensed medication use and associated adverse drug
events in a pediatric emergency department. Pediatr Emerg Care.
2010;26(6):424–30.
7. Conroy S. Unlicensed and off-label drug use: issues and recommendations. Pediatr Drugs. 2002;4(6):353–9.
8. Knellwolf AL, Bauzon S, Alberighi ODC, Lutsar I, Bacsy E,
Alfarez D, et al. Framework conditions facilitating paediatric
clinical research. Ital J Pediatr. 2011;37:12.
9. United States of America. Pediatric Research Equity Act.
2003. Available at: www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/development
approvalprocess/developmentresources/ucm077853.pdf. Accessed
12 June 2014.
10. European Medicines Agency. Paediatric Regulation. 2006.
Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/
regulation/document_listing/document_listing_000068.jsp. Accessed 12 June 2014.
11. Pincus T. Limitations of randomized clinical trials to recognize
possible advantages of combination therapies in rheumatic diseases. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 1993;23(2 Suppl):2–10.
12. Valkhoff VE, Schade R, ‘t Jong GW, Romio S, Schuemie MJ,
Arfe A, et al. Population-based analysis of non-steroidal antiinflammatory drug use among children in four European countries in the SOS project: what size of data platforms and which
study designs do we need to assess safety issues? BMC Pediatr.
2013;13:192.
13. CIOMS. Practical aspects of signal detection in pharmacovigilance. Report of CIOMS Working Group VIII. Geneva:
CIOMS; 2010.
14. de Bie S, Verhamme KMC, Straus SMJM, Stricker BHC,
Sturkenboom MCJM. Vaccine-based subgroup analysis in VigiBase: effect on sensitivity in paediatric signal detection. Drug
Saf. 2012;35(4):335–46.
15. Schuemie MJ, Coloma PM, Straatman H, Herings RM, Trifiro G,
Matthews JN, et al. Using electronic healthcare records for drug
safety signal detection: a comparative evaluation of statistical
methods. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2012;21:342.
16. De Bie S, Coloma P, Ferrajolo C, Trifiro G, Verhamme K,
Schuemie M, et al. The power of electronic healthcare databases
for active drug safety surveillance in children and adolescents:
an EUADR study. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2012;21:
329–30.
17. Coloma PM, Trifiro G, Schuemie MJ, Gini R, Herings R, Hippisley-Cox J, et al. Electronic healthcare databases for active drug
safety surveillance: is there enough leverage? Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2012;21(6):611–21.
18. Ferrajolo C, Coloma PM, Verhamme KMC, Schuemie MJ, de Bie
S, Gini R, et al. Signal detection of potentially drug-induced
acute liver injury in children using a multi-country healthcare
database network. Drug Saf. 2014;37(2):99–108.
19. Coloma PM, Avillach P, Salvo F, Schuemie MJ, Ferrajolo C,
Pariente A, et al. A reference standard for evaluation of methods
for drug safety signal detection using electronic healthcare record
databases. Drug Saf. 2013;36(1):13–23.
20. Ryan PB, Schuemie MJ, Welebob E, Duke J, Valentine S,
Hartzema AG. Defining a reference set to support methodological
research in drug safety. Drug Saf. 2013;36(Suppl 1):S33–47.
21. Sturkenboom MCJM, Verhamme KMC, Nicolosi A, Murray ML,
Neubert A, Caudri D, et al. Drug use in children: cohort study in
three European countries. BMJ. 2008;337(7682):1338–41.

Reference Set for Pediatric Drug Safety Signal Detection
22. European Medicines Agency. Report on the survey of all paediatric uses of medicinal products in Europe. 2010. http://www.
ema.europa.eu/ema/pages/includes/document/opendocument.jsp?
webContentId=WC500101006. Accessed 1 Dec 2014.
23. World Health Organization. WHO model lists of essential
medicines. 2013. Available at: http://www.who.int/medicines/
publications/essentialmedicines/en/index.html. Accessed 1 Dec
2014.
24. Alexander J. Doxycycline medKit regulatory background. 2012.
Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/advisorycommittees/
committeesmeetingmaterials/drugs/anti-infectivedrugsadvisory
committee/ucm299210.pdf. Accessed 16 June 2014.
25. Lawrenson RA, Seaman HE, Sundstrom A, Williams TJ, Farmer
RDT. Liver damage associated with minocycline use in acne: a
systematic review of the published literature and pharmacovigilance data. Drug Saf. 2000;23(4):333–49.
26. Star K, Noren GN, Nordin K, Edwards IR. Suspected adverse
drug reactions reported for children worldwide: An exploratory
study using vigibase. Drug Safety. 2011;34(5):415–28.
27. World Health Organization, Quality Assurance and Safety of
Medicines Team. Safety of medicines. A guide to detecting and
reporting adverse drug reactions: why health professionals need
to take action. 2002. Available at: http://www.who.int/iris/handle/
10665/67378. Accessed 16 June 2014.
28. Datapharm Communications Limited. Electronic medicines
compendium. Available at: http://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/.
Accessed 21 June 2014.
29. National Library of Medicine. DailyMed. Available at: http://
dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/about.cfm?CFID=74319392&
CFTOKEN=69c4f4d2dc469ecc-E9581537-B0F2-4DB4-C2BF7E
65FAC84A0E&jsessionid=84303863c51992297375697f415945
67791b. Accessed 21 June 2014.
30. Choonara I. Unlicensed and off-label drug use in children:
implications for safety. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2004;3(2):81–3.
31. Hochberg AM, Hauben M, Pearson RK, O’Hara DJ, Reisinger SJ,
Goldsmith DI, et al. An evaluation of three signal-detection algorithms using a highly inclusive reference event database. Drug
Saf. 2009;32(6):509–25.
32. Hauben M, Reich L, Chung S. Postmarketing surveillance of
potentially fatal reactions to oncology drugs: potential utility of
two signal-detection algorithms. Eur J Clin Pharmacol.
2004;60(10):747–50.
33. Lindquist M, Stahl M, Bate A, Edwards IR, Meyboom RHB. A
retrospective evaluation of a data mining approach to aid finding
new adverse drug reaction signals in the WHO international
database. Drug Saf. 2000;23(6):533–42.
34. Pearson JF, Brownstein CA, Brownstein JS. Potential for electronic health records and online social networking to redefine
medical research. Clin Chem. 2011;57(2):196–204.
35. Zhou X-H, Obuchowski N, McClish D. Statistical methods in
diagnostic medicine. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 2011.
36. Madan A, Jain NK, Sharma TN, Sharma DK, Madan R.
Attempted suicide following treatment with isoniazid. Tubercle.
1989;70(2):147–9.
37. Bertuola F, Morando C, Menniti-Ippolito F, Da Cas R, Capuano
A, Perilongo G, et al. Association between drug and vaccine use
and acute immune thrombocytopenia in childhood: a case-control
study in Italy. Drug Saf. 2010;33(1):65–72.
38. Wallerstedt SM, Brunlof G, Sundstrom A, Eriksson AL. Montelukast and psychiatric disorders in children. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2009;18(9):858–64.
39. Bygdell M, Brunlof G, Wallerstedt SM, Kindblom JM. Psychiatric adverse drug reactions reported during a 10-year period in

217

40.
41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.
52.

53.
54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

the Swedish pediatric population. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf.
2012;21(1):79–86.
Shibib S, Chalhoub N. Stimulant-induced psychosis. Child
Adolesc Ment Health. 2009;14(1):20–3.
Maguire RB, Stroncek DF, Campbell AC. Recurrent pancytopenia, coagulopathy, and renal failure associated with multiple
quinine-dependent antibodies. Ann Intern Med. 1993;119(3):
215–7.
Sutherland R, Vincent PC, Raik E, Burgess K, Sutherland R,
Vincent PC, et al. Quinine-induced agranulocytosis: toxic effect
of quinine bisulphate on bone marrow cultures in vitro. BMJ.
1977;1(6061):605–7.
Peterson JA, Nelson TN, Kanack AJ, Aster RH. Fine specificity
of drug-dependent antibodies reactive with a restricted domain of
platelet GPIIIA. Blood. 2008;111(3):1234–9.
Bremner JD, Shearer K, McCaffery P. Retinoic acid and affective
disorders: the evidence for an association. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010;35:S115.
Bremner JD, McCaffery P. The neurobiology of retinoic acid in
affective disorders. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry.
2008;32(2):315–31.
Pliszka SR. Pharmacologic treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: efficacy, safety and mechanisms of action.
Neuropsychol Rev. 2007;17(1):61–72.
Ross RG. Psychotic and manic-like symptoms during stimulant
treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163(7):1149–52.
Claassen S, Zunkler BJ. Comparison of the effects of metoclopramide and domperidone on HERG channels. Pharmacology.
2005;74(1):31–6.
Stork D, Timin EN, Berjukow S, Huber C, Hohaus A, Auer M,
et al. State dependent dissociation of HERG channel inhibitors.
Br J Pharmacol. 2007;151(8):1368–76.
Stanat SJC, Carlton CG, Crumb WJ Jr, Agrawal KC, Clarkson
CW. Characterization of the inhibitory effects of erythromycin
and clarithromycin on the HERG potassium channel. Mol Cell
Biochem. 2003;254(1–2):1–7.
Sheldon R, Duff H, Koshman ML. Antiarrhythmic activity of
quinine in humans. Circulation. 1995;92(10):2944–50.
White NJ, Looareesuwan S, Warrell DA. Quinine and quinidine:
a comparison of EKG effects during the treatment of malaria.
J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1983;5(2):173–5.
Nanau RM, Neuman MG. Ibuprofen-induced hypersensitivity
syndrome. Transl Res. 2010;155(6):275–93.
Wood JD, Peesker SJ. A correlation between changes in GABA
metabolism and isonicotinic acid hydrazide-induced seizures.
Brain Res. 1972;45(2):489–98.
Carmichael J, Shankel SW. Effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on prostaglandins and renal function. Am J Med.
1985;78(6 Pt 1):992–1000.
Brinker AD, Beitz J. Spontaneous reports of thrombocytopenia in
association with quinine: clinical attributes and timing related to
regulatory action. Am J Hematol. 2002;70(4):313–7.
Noren GN, Caster O, Juhlin K, Lindquist M. Zoo or savannah?
Choice of training ground for evidence-based pharmacovigilance.
Drug Saf. 2014;37(9):655–9.
Alvarez Y, Hidalgo A, Maignen F, Slattery J. Validation of statistical signal detection procedures in eudravigilance post-authorization data: a retrospective evaluation of the potential for
earlier signalling. Drug Saf. 2010;33(6):475–87.
Harpaz R, Odgers D, Gaskin G, DuMouchel W, Winnenburg R,
Bodenreider O, et al. A time-indexed reference standard of adverse
drug reactions. Sci Data. 2014;1. doi:10.1038/sdata.2014.43.

