pharmacoepidemiology and drug safety 2014; 23: 795–801
Published online 12 February 2014 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/pds.3561

ORIGINAL REPORT

AERS spider: an online interactive tool to mine statistical associations
in Adverse Event Reporting System
Igor Grigoriev1, Wolfgang zu Castell1, Philipp Tsvetkov2 and Alexey V. Antonov3*
1

Helmholtz Zentrum München GmbH, Department of Scientiﬁc Computing, Neuherberg, Germany
Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
3
MRC Toxicology Unit, Hodgkin Building, Leicester, UK
2

ABSTRACT
Background Exploration of the Adverse Event Reporting System (AERS) data by a wide scientiﬁc community is limited due to several
factors. First, AERS data must be intensively preprocessed to be converted into analyzable format. Second, application of the currently accepted disproportional reporting measures results in false positive signals.
Methods We proposed a data mining strategy to improve hypothesis generation with respect to potential associations.
Results By numerous examples, we illustrate that our strategy controls the false positive signals. We implemented a free online tool, AERS
spider (www.chemoproﬁling.org/AERS).
Conclusions We believe that AERS spider would be a valuable tool for drug safety experts. Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
key words—pharmacovigilance; data mining; AERS; FDA; pharmacoepidemiology
Received 7 June 2013; Revised 28 October 2013; Accepted 3 December 2013

INTRODUCTION
The Adverse Event Reporting System (AERS) is a
computerized information database designed to support
the FDA’s post-marketing safety surveillance program
for all approved drug. Currently, the publicly available
data covers more than one million reports submitted
mainly from 1999 to 2011. The publicly available
quarterly data ﬁles (http://www.fda.gov/) include
patient demographic and administrative information,
patient indications, drug information, reaction information, patient outcome information as well as some
additional much less regular information.1
A variety of data mining procedures have been
proposed recently to screen pharmacovigilance databases for potential “drug-to-Adverse Event” associations.2–12 A commonly accepted principle to detect
signals is to use different forms of disproportional
reporting rates.13,14 For example, proportional
reporting ratio (PRR) is the ratio of the frequency of
*Correspondence to: A. V. Antonov, MRC Toxicology Unit, Hodgkin Building,
Lancaster Road, Leicester LE1 9HN, UK. E-mail: aa668@leicester.ac.uk

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

an Adverse Event (AE) in subpopulation of reports exposed to a drug and the frequency of an AE in the
background population. Disproportional reporting
principles are widely used for the detection of signals
in pharmacovigilance databases at regulatory agencies
and pharmaceutical companies in many countries.7
The analysis of AERS data is complicated by the
need to extensively preprocess the data. In its publicly
available form, AERS data is rather a collection of
reports than a database. Drugs are usually reported
by various brand and generic names. Several other
issues, e.g. multiple report duplication, must also be
resolved. Data preparation is absolutely required before any analytical steps are attempted and represents
a serious technical challenge. These factors make it
extremely complicated for the broad scientiﬁc community to obtain analytical results from AERS data on a
particular issue. It is imperative to develop tools
which could provide easy-to-use data mining access
to AERS data.15–19
Several online tools are currently available providing
analytical access to AERS data. FDAble seems to be
the ﬁrst web tool which provides analytical services

796

i. grigoriev et al.

by computing PRRs.15 FDAble provides an option to
search for potential drug safety signals. FDAble reports
PRR values for all AEs. Similar to FDAble, OpenVigil
provides several options to query a drug-to-AE association providing PRR value.17 However, both tools do
not account for the intrinsic complexity of AERS data
that practically results in reporting of false positive
signals. Let us consider several illustrative examples
related to “aspirin” and “calcium”.
Brief inspection of results provided by FDAble for
aspirin reveals the issue with false positive signals
(see Figure 1a). Multiple cardio related and obviously
false positive associated adverse reactions are reported
with PRR > 5. OpenVigil provides similar results. For
example, PRR reported for “aspirin-to-ANGINA
UNSTABLE” association is 4.21 with the general conclusion that this drug-event-association is signiﬁcant.
For “calcium”, FDAble reports all possible “fracture”
outcomes with PRR from 3 up to 15. These simple
examples demonstrate that practical application of
disproportional reporting principles to detect signals
from AERS data often leads to identiﬁcation of AEs
for which the drug is actually being used.
In our estimate, the share of false positive signals
(with PRR > 2) can reach up to 50% for most of the
drugs. The authors of FDAble are probably aware of
the issue and impose very strict threshold (PRR >
10, red points in Figure 1) to consider the signal to

be signiﬁcant. However, it is clear that even such a
strict threshold does not guarantee the absence of false
positive signals while ﬁltering many true positive
associations (for example, for “calcium” the obvious
false positive outcome “OPEN REDUCTION OF
FRACTURE” has PRR > 15, and present among red
points which are not freely available, FDAble is commercial tool). We used such obvious false positive cases
to illustrate the issue. In general, there is no reliable way
to ﬁgure out the false positive nature of the signal based
only on PRR value, even imposing strict thresholds.
We would like to stress that in the majority of cases
the false positive signals have nothing to do with
well-known concerns regarding the quality of AERS
data, such as duplication of reports, missing data,
typographical errors, inaccuracy of reporting, variation
in granularity and terminology used, underreporting
and media inﬂuences.2,4,7,18,19 The reason lies in the
nature of AERS data and the need to consider multiple
risk factors present in the data which are not accounted
for by simple PRR measure.
The prior risk (the risk before drug usage) of certain adverse outcomes is extremely unequally distributed across
various report groups in AERS data. Patients taking a
particular drug, as a rule, have an incomparably high risk
of certain adverse outcomes in comparison to a general
population (a considerable proportion of people taking
aspirin has a high risk of cardio adverse outcomes). In

Figure 1. False positive signal issue: a) FDAble search for potential “aspirin” safety signals. The ﬁgure lists a few obviously false positive signals with PRR
> 5. In total, there are more than 50 cardio related signals with PRR > 5. b) FDAble search for potential “calcium” safety signals. The ﬁgure shows several
“fracture” signals with PRR > 5. Almost all “fracture” related outcomes are reported with PRR > 3

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 2014; 23: 795–801
DOI: 10.1002/pds

tool to mine statistical associations in aers

many cases, the PRR merely indicates this fact, rather
than the risk which is directly associated to the drug administration. To account for this, we propose a semi-automated strategy to correct prior-to-drug usage risk of
the adverse outcome between drug and background
subpopulations, by removing report subgroups marked
by factors with apparently high risk of the adverse
outcome. We refer to such factors (indications, age groups,
gender, others drugs) as “mask” factors to point out that
they can disguise the real strength of a drug-to-AE
association.
In this paper, we present AERS Spider (www.
chemoproﬁling.org/AERS), a web tool which implements an iterative procedure to explore “drug-to-AE” association pattern. AERS Spider computes not only the
PRR for a given drug and a given AE but also derives
all other potential “mask” factors which are considerably
associated (based on computed PRR value) to the AE.
The user can selectively (based on his/her expert opinion)
remove these factors from consideration and, thus,
account for all (or at least available in the AERS data) risk

797

factors which might disguise the real value of association
between the drug and the AE. We provided examples
supporting that the iterative procedure implemented in
AERS spider improves hypothesis generation with respect to potential associations.
METHODS
Data pre-processing
Information from the AERS database is reduced to
uniﬁed data model (Figure 2). The following attributes
of each report are considered: date of the report, patent
gender, age, indication(s), drug(s) and reaction(s). There
are many reports with one or several missing attributes,
i.e. no indication or gender is speciﬁed. Only reports
which have all attributes available (at least one value
speciﬁed) are considered. The one widely recognized
issue with the AERS data is multiple duplication entries.
To address this issue, reports from the same date, gender
and age, which had the same indication(s) and reaction
(s), the same or at least three common drugs were

Figure 2. Each report from AERS raw data is converted into object with uniﬁed list of attributes (Date, Age, Gender, Indication(s), Reaction(s), Drug(s)). The
name space for each attribute is uniﬁed. Each attribute (a drug, an indication, a reaction) deﬁnes a subpopulation of objects

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 2014; 23: 795–801
DOI: 10.1002/pds

798

i. grigoriev et al.

considered to be multiple entries and only one report is
considered for the purpose of our analyses.
The key issue in data preparation is mapping of drug
names from original reports to uniﬁed drug name
space. In original AERS data, drugs are reported by
multiple brand or multiple generic names including
multiple mixtures. In addition, the same name can be
written in multiple ways, which would be treated by the
computer as different. We implemented a semi-automatic
mapping procedure using ﬁles from DrugBank.20 In the
majority of cases, the DrugBank provides, for most
FDA-approved drugs, a comprehensive list of brand
and generic names, including names of drug mixtures
where the drug (active compound) is present. Thus,
original drug names from AERS data were remapped to
uniﬁed name space of DrugBank IDs. In a few very
speciﬁc cases, several DrugBank IDs were grouped into
one. For example, one of such cases is related to
“Insulin”. DrugBank has several IDs which are related
to slightly different (on molecular level) forms of Insulin.
In most cases, from AERS report, it is not clear which
one was actually used. For the purpose of our analyses,
all such cases are mapped to a general ID “Insulin” and
are considered as one drug.
Adverse reactions (as well as indications) in AERS
are coded to terms in the Medical Dictionary for
Regulatory Activities terminology (MedDRA). We
created aggregate Adverse Reactions attributes which
are merely a union of several Adverse Reactions. The
name of aggregate Adverse Reaction corresponds to
the most representative Adverse Reaction with extension “Sub Group” or “Group” at the end. “Sub Group”
means more speciﬁc class while “Group” means a very
non-speciﬁc set of adverse outcomes.
AERS spider
AERS spider is a free online tool (http://www.
chemoproﬁling.org/AERS/). Currently, AERS spider provides two query options, General Drug Query and Speciﬁc
Drug Query. For the General Drug Query, the user needs
to specify a drug and a background set from available
options. As output, the list of putative signals (PRR > 2)
is provided. The user can explore each reported “drug to
adverse reaction” association using Speciﬁc Drug Query.
Speciﬁc Drug Query is an online interactive form
which allows the user to remove/restore “mask”
factors while exploring “drug to adverse reaction”
association. As output, the user gets two tables. The
ﬁrst table provides the list of factors which were
removed from consideration at previous steps and the
option to restore each of them. The second table
provides the list of current “mask” factors. By deﬁnition,
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

all factors with PRR value higher than 3 are provided, i.e.
all indications, age groups and other drugs which
according to AERS data have strong (PRR > 3) association to adverse reaction are computed and provided. In
some cases, the list may consist of up to several hundred
factors. The user can either mark them for removal manually or remove them in a semi-automated way by setting
the minimal PRR threshold value. After marking the
“mask” factors, the user can update the signal. The list
of “mask” factors is also updated. The procedure can to
be repeated iteratively.
Figure 3 illustrates a general principle of our data
mining strategy. In the ﬁrst step, similar to other
available tools, we compute PRR value for the drug
and AE of interest. However, additionally we provide
a possibility for the user to see all other potential
“mask” factors (other drugs, indications, age groups,
gender) which have high PRR value of association to
the AE. We provide interactive possibility for the user
to remove these factors from consideration. The new
updated PRR is computed accounting for removed
factors. The list of potential “mask” factors is updated
as well. The procedure can be repeated iteratively
unless all suspicious factors are removed.
RESULTS
Examples
To illustrate that our strategy resolves the false positive
signal issue, we explore several obvious false positive
associations which were used in the introduction. Table 1
summarizes PRR values for several “calcium-to-fracture”
and “aspirin-to-cardio” cases computed based on AERS
data. Rows 1a, 2a and 3a report raw PRR values without
accounting for multiple “mask” factors. Rows 1b, 2b and
3b provide the PRR values for the same associations after
removal of apparent risk “mask” factors.
The raw PRR (without accounting for multiple risk
factors) for “Calcium-to-OPEN REDUCTION OF
FRACTURE” association is 17.32 with 20 incidents
of AE for patients administrating calcium (see Table 1,
row 1a). The list of potential “Mask” factors proposed
by the AERS spider (the list of potential “Mask”
factors includes all “indications”, “drugs” and “age
groups” which are associated to “Reaction” with PRR
> 3) includes multiple factors which point out to the
group of patients with “BONE DENSITY” problems
(“OSTEOPOROSIS”, “Bone Density Conservation
Agents”). Most of these patients have incomparably
higher risk of various “fracture” outcomes. After
removal a subgroup of reports marked with “Bone Density Conservation Agents” there is no one incidence of
Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 2014; 23: 795–801
DOI: 10.1002/pds

tool to mine statistical associations in aers

799

Figure 3. Principles of AERS spider. a) PRR: the frequency of the adverse reaction (AR) in the drug subpopulation is deﬁned as a proportion of reports with
AR. Proportional reporting ratio (PRR) compares the frequencies of AR in the drug and background populations. b) “Mask” factors (shown as Factor1,
Factor2, Factor3 and Factor4) are report subgroups (indications, other drugs, age groups) with incomparable high prior risk of AR (“mask” factors are inferred
by AERS spider by computing PRR of association between the factor and the AR, by deﬁnition all factors with PRR > 3 are reported by AERS spider as “mask”
factors). The “mask” factors may substantially affect the estimate of frequency of the AR either in drug subpopulation (Factor1, Factor3) or in the background
population (Factor2, Factor4). c) Data mining strategy: “Mask” factors are removed from consideration (based on high PRR value and the user expert opinion).
Both frequencies of AR in the drug and the background populations are recomputed accounting for removed factors (shown as blank space). The updated value
of PRR is supposed to reﬂect the risk of AR more objectively in relation to the drug administration. The procedure may be repeated iteratively

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 2014; 23: 795–801
DOI: 10.1002/pds

800

i. grigoriev et al.

Table 1. False positive signals used as negative control examples. The table reports raw PRR values (1a, 2a, 3a rows) without accounting for multiple risk
“mask” factors. Rows 1b, 2b and 3b provide corrected signal values after removal of several obvious “mask” risk factors
#

Drug

Reaction

PRR

Number of reports with
drug and reaction

Number of reports
with drug

Number of reports
with reaction

Number of reports
background

1a

Calcium

17.32

20

36 482

54

1 110 704

1b

Calcium

0.00

0

18 751

9

1 023 140

2a
2b
3a
3b

Calcium
Calcium
Aspirin
Aspirin

OPEN REDUCTION
OF FRACTURE
OPEN REDUCTION
OF FRACTURE
COMPRESSION FRACTURE
COMPRESSION FRACTURE
ANGINA UNSTABLE
ANGINA UNSTABLE

7.61
0.86
7.99
0.99

128
1
300
4

36 482
12 050
79 845
20 329

623
80
770
153

1 110 704
833 266
1 078 929
771 553

“OPEN REDUCTION OF FRACTURE” in calcium
report subpopulation (see Table 1, row 1b).
In the second “calcium-to-fracture” case (see Table 1,
row 2a), in addition to apparent “BONE DENSITY”
factors, one needs to remove less obvious ones. “CEREBROVASCULAR ACCIDENT” patients are known to
have high risk of fractures due to the frequent falls at the
start of the incident. “CANCER” patients are also
known to have a higher risk of bone fractures.21 3After
removal of above mentioned factors (for the full list,
please, see supplementary table 1.2), the new recomputed
PRR value for “Calcium-to-COMPRESSION FRACTURE” is 0.86 with the only one registered incident in
“Calcium” subpopulation (see Table 1, row 2b).
For “Aspirin-to-ANGINA UNSTABLE” case, the list
of potential “mask” factors proposed by AERS spider
points out mainly to the group of patients with obvious
cardio related problems, like, indications “MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION”, “ANGINA PECTORIS” or patients who administered the drugs which obviously point
out to the patient cardiovascular problems (“Antihypertensive Agents”, “Antithrombotic Agents”, “Nitrates and
Nitrites”). After removal of these factors (for the full list
see supplementary table 1.3), the new recomputed PRR
value for “Aspirin-to-ANGINA UNSTABLE” is 0.99
with the only four registered incidents out of 20 000
reports in “Aspirin” subpopulation.
The false positive nature of the signals presented in
Table 1 is obvious even for the non-expert. However,
there are many cases which are not so transparent.
Let us consider one of such examples. Glyburide is
an oral antihyperglycemic agent used for the treatment
of non-insulin-dependent diabetes. PRR value for
“Glyburide-to-LACTIC ACIDOSIS” association is 3.91
with 52 incidences of “LACTIC ACIDOSIS” followed
by “Glyburide” administration. The false positive nature
of association is not obvious taking into account that
some of the antihyperglycemic agents, like, “Metformin”
are known to be associated with “LACTIC ACIDOSIS”.22 The fact actually could be used as an argument
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

to consider “Glyburide” as a risk factor (because both
drugs are used to treat the same indication and could
potentially share a common mechanism which leads to
a common side effect). In fact, “Metformin” is a mask
factor. After removal of “Metformin” reports from
consideration, the updated PRR value for “Glyburideto-LACTIC ACIDOSIS” association is only 1.19 and
indicates of no causative relation between administration
of “Glyburide” and “LACTIC ACIDOSIS”.
Examples presented above illustrate that false positive associations can be ﬁltered out by removal of several related “mask” factors. This supports that our data
mining strategy accounts for multiple risk factors and
thereby reduces the number of PRR signals to more
informative ones.
DISCUSSION
AERS data represent a large and extremely valuable
resource to explore relations of multiple factors in
respect to drug safety issues. The database is growing
constantly by approximately 250 thousands new
reports each year, covering new and established drugs
on the market. It is imperative to develop tools which
could provide easy-to-use data mining access to AERS
data for drug safety experts.
The aim of this paper is mainly to address the issue
with false positive signals resulting from practical
application of disproportional reporting principles to
AERS data without accounting for multiple risk
factors. In the majority of cases, the phenomenon has
nothing to do with widely recognized issues related
to quality of AERS data and thus can be overcome
by appropriate data mining strategy. We propose the
data mining strategy implemented as online interactive
web tool and illustrate that our tool is an efﬁcient
instrument to control false positive signals. We believe
that AERS spider would be a valuable tool for drug
safety experts for fast validation of various hypotheses
related to drug safety issues. On the other hand, we
Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 2014; 23: 795–801
DOI: 10.1002/pds

tool to mine statistical associations in aers

would like to make crystal clear that provided hypotheses need further investigation.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors certify that there are no personal, commercial or academic conﬂicts of interest with any ﬁnancial
organization regarding the material discussed in the
manuscript.
KEY POINTS
The analysis of AERS data for a wide public is
complicated by the need to extensively preprocess the data.
• Currently available tools do not account for the
intrinsic complexity of AERS data that practically results in reporting of false positive signals.
• We present AERS, a web tool which implements
an iterative strategy to test false positive nature of
detected signals.

•

ETHICS STATEMENT
This study did not require ethics approval, as no human
or animal subjects were involved.
REFERENCES
1. US Food and Drug Administration. Adverse Event Reporting System <http://
www.fda.gov/cder/aers/default.htm>. FDA 2012.
2. Almenoff JS, Pattishall EN, Gibbs TG, DuMouchel W, Evans SJ, Yuen N. Novel
statistical tools for monitoring the safety of marketed drugs 1. Clin Pharmacol
Ther 2007; 82(2): 157–166.
3. Bate A, Evans SJ. Quantitative signal detection using spontaneous ADR
reporting 1. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2009; 18(6): 427–436.
4. Harpaz R, Perez H, Chase HS, Rabadan R, Hripcsak G, Friedman C. Biclustering
of adverse drug events in the FDA’s spontaneous reporting system 1. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2011; 89(2): 243–250.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

801

5. Hauben M, Madigan D, Patadia V, Sakaguchi M, van Puijenbroek E. Quantitative signal detection for vaccines 1. Hum Vaccin 2010; 6(8): 681.
6. Hochberg AM, Hauben M. Time-to-signal comparison for drug safety datamining algorithms vs. traditional signaling criteria 4. Clin Pharmacol Ther
2009; 85(6): 600–606.
7. Moore N, Hall G, Sturkenboom M, Mann R, Lagnaoui R, Begaud B. Biases affecting the proportional reporting ratio (PPR) in spontaneous reports
pharmacovigilance databases: the example of sertindole. Pharmacoepidemiol
Drug Saf 2003; 12(4): 271–281.
8. Stephenson WP, Hauben M. Data mining for signals in spontaneous reporting
databases: proceed with caution 1. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2007; 16(4):
359–365.
9. Triﬁro G, Pariente A, Coloma PM, et al. Data mining on electronic health record
databases for signal detection in pharmacovigilance: which events to monitor? 5.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2009; 18(12): 1176–1184.
10. Waller P, Beard K, Egberts T, et al. European commission consultation on
pharmacovigilance 6. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2008; 17(2): 108–9.
11. Wang HW, Hochberg AM, Pearson RK, Hauben M. An experimental investigation of masking in the US FDA adverse event reporting system database 1. Drug
Saf 2010; 33(12): 1117–1133.
12. Tatonetti NP, Ye PP, Daneshjou R, Altman RB. Data-driven prediction of drug
effects and interactions 1. Sci Transl Med 2012; 4(125): 125ra31.
13. Evans SJ, Waller PC, Davis S. Use of proportional reporting ratios (PRRs) for
signal generation from spontaneous adverse drug reaction reports.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2001; 10(6): 483–486.
14. Levine JG, Tonning JM, Szarfman A. Reply: The evaluation of data mining
methods for the simultaneous and systematic detection of safety signals in
large databases: lessons to be learned 4. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2006; 61(1):
105–113.
15. Pratt LA, Danese PN. More eyeballs on AERS 1. Nat Biotechnol 2009; 27(7): 601–2.
16. Anonymous. Making a difference. Nat Biotechnol 2009; 27(297).
17. Bohm R, Hocker J, Cascorbi I, Herdegen T. OpenVigil-free eyeballs on AERS
pharmacovigilance data 1. Nat Biotechnol 2012; 30(2): 137–138.
18. Hauben M, Madigan D, Gerrits CM, Walsh L, Van Puijenbroek EP. The
role of data mining in pharmacovigilance 3. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2005;
4(5): 929–948.
19. Wilson AM, Thabane L, Holbrook A. Application of data mining techniques in
pharmacovigilance 4. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 57(2): 127–134.
20. Knox C, Law V, Jewison T, et al. DrugBank 3.0: a comprehensive resource for
“omics” research on drugs 1. Nucleic Acids Res 2011; 39(Database issue):
D1035–D1041.
21. Guise TA. Bone loss and fracture risk associated with cancer therapy. Oncologist
2006; 11(10): 1121–1131.
22. Misbin RI. The phantom of lactic acidosis due to metformin in patients with diabetes 3. Diabetes Care 2004; 27(7): 1791–1803.

SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information may be found in
the online version at the publisher’s website.

Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 2014; 23: 795–801
DOI: 10.1002/pds

