REVIEW
A Pattern Discovery Framework for Adverse Event Evaluation
and Inference in Spontaneous Reporting Systems
Marianthi Markatou1,2 and Robert Ball3,†
1
2

T. J. Watson Research Center, IBM, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA

Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health and Health Professions, SUNY Buffalo, Buffalo, NY
14216, USA

3

Office of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug
Administration, Rockville, MD 20852, USA
Received 27 June 2013; revised 27 February 2014; accepted 18 May 2014
DOI:10.1002/sam.11233
Published online 14 August 2014 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com).

Abstract: Safety of medical products is a major public health concern. We present a critical discussion of the currently used
analytical tools for mining spontaneous reporting systems (SRS) to identify safety signals after use of medical products. We
introduce a pattern discovery framework for the analysis of SRS. The terminology ‘pattern discovery’ is borrowed from the
engineering and artificial intelligence literature and signifies that the basis of the proposed framework is the medical case, formalizing the cognitive paradigm known to clinicians who evaluate individual patients and individual case safety reports submitted to
SRS. The fundamental contribution of this approach is a strong probabilistic component that may account for selection and other
biases and facilitates rigorous modeling and inference. We discuss somewhat in depth the concept of signal in pharmacovigilance
and connect it with the concept of a pattern; we illustrate this conceptual framework using the example of anaphylaxis. Finally,
we propose a research agenda in statistics, informatics, and pharmacovigilance practices needed to advance the pattern discovery
framework in both the short and long terms. © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Statistical Analysis and Data Mining 7: 352–367, 2014
Keywords:
functions

pattern discovery; inference; probability models; pharmacovigilance; anaphylaxis; copulas; similarity/distance

1.

INTRODUCTION

Safety of medical products continues to be a major
public health concern. Adverse events are a serious problem
worldwide resulting in injuries and deaths [1–4] as well
as increasing hospital expenses [5,6]. Continual monitoring
of drugs, vaccines, devices, and other medical products
after approval for use is essential for patient and consumer,
safety [7].
While clinical trials conducted prelicensure [8–10]
remain the primary sources of safety information about
medical products, and increasingly, administrative claims
and electronic health record (EHR) data are used in
∗

Correspondence to: Robert Ball (Robert.Ball@fda.hhs.gov)
address: Deputy Director, Office of Surveillance and
Epidemiology, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, FDA,
10903 New Hampshire Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 20993, USA.
† Current

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

surveillance and epidemiological studies post-licensure
[11], our focus is the analysis of safety data from spontaneous reporting systems (SRS). There are three reasons for
this. First, spontaneous reports will in the foreseeable future
provide critical first alerts for emerging medical product
safety concerns. Second, the number of spontaneous reports
collected by pharmaceutical companies, public health and
regulatory agencies continues to increase, and improving
the efficiency and quality with which these reports are
evaluated is critical. Third, systematic approaches to analysis of these data have only recently begun, and recent
advances in statistical and computational theory and practice provide the opportunity to integrate the traditional
approaches applied by clinicians and epidemiologists with
rigorous statistical thinking and computer automation. We
believe that regardless of the outcome of efforts to improve
safety monitoring in clinical trials, administrative claims,

Markatou and Ball: A Pattern Discovery Framework for Spontaneous Reporting Systems

and EHR systems, optimizing the analysis of SRS data is
necessary to advance the science of medical product safety
assessment.
To illustrate the usefulness of SRS in identifying and
characterizing rare or very rare adverse events, we use
the example of the RotaShield vaccine and intussusception
(IS) in 1998. In prelicensure clinical trials of RotaShield, a
not statistically significant increase in IS was noted among
recipients of the vaccine compared with control. Specifically, the first trial identified five cases of IS in 10 054
vaccinees (rate of 0.05%), the second recognized two cases
in 8240 receiving the licensed formulation (0.024%), the
third identified three cases in 3106 receiving other formulations (0.097%), and the fourth identified one case in 4633
placebo controls (0.022%). There was no statistically significant difference between these rates, although the sample
sizes used in the aforementioned trials made it difficult
to know with certainty whether IS was associated with
RotaShield. A subsequent study found a lack of apparent
association of IS with wild rotavirus, so RotaShield was
approved and recommended for use in infants in the United
States [12]. As a precaution, IS was listed as potential
adverse event in labeling and included in monitoring after
licensure. After a few cases of IS were reported to Vaccine
Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS), a pattern was
noted by experienced medical reviewers that began to raise
concern: IS after RotaShield was occurring at younger ages
than typically seen (for initial VAERS reports, the median
age was 3 months with 14/15 between 3 and 7 months) and
the time to onset of occurrence relative to vaccination was
both different than for other adverse event’s reported after
RotaShield, and consistent with what would be expected if
IS was related to the replication of the live viral vaccine in
the intestinal tract, which was part of the mode of action
for this orally administered vaccine (MMWR 1999). Subsequently, additional cases of IS were reported to VAERS and
epidemiologic studies showed an increased risk of IS within
1 week after RotaShield [13]. Retrospective application of
empirical Bayesian disproportionality analysis (retrospective because the method had not been fully developed in
1998) also signaled that IS was occurring with unexpected
frequency after the RotaShield vaccine.
Hand and Bolton [14, p. 886] discuss the need for developing a sound underlying theory for any science or technology to advance effectively. Current data mining algorithms
(DMAs) routinely applied to SRS, with the exception of
statistical methods such as likelihood ratio test (LRT) [15]
and Multi-item Gamma-Poisson Shrinker (MGPS) [16] lack
a firm inferential basis. While LRT and MGPS methods are
steps in this direction for analysis of SRS data, they invoke
assumptions that may be difficult or even impossible to justify in a given SRS, the most important one being treating

353

spontaneous reports as a simple random sample. Furthermore, standards for the evaluation of the algorithms used
for adverse event identification in SRS data that guarantee consistency of results among the different identification
algorithms, including generating functions to simulate SRS,
have not been fully developed. We further discuss the limitations of the various algorithms in Section 2.
We discuss a ‘pattern discovery’ framework that attempts
to formalize the thought process used by clinicians when
analyzing SRS data. This cognitive paradigm is known
to physicians who evaluate individual patients. In extending traditional clinical practice to evaluation of SRS data,
the clinician will compare the characteristics of a patient
described in a report with ‘similar’ patients the clinician
has encountered in the past [17,18]. In pharmacovigilance,
this concept of similar patterns has been formalized by
using the case definition of an adverse event as the first
step in a case series analysis [19]. This approach works
well when characterizing known adverse events. But in the
context of safety surveillance, one also needs a method
that has the potential to identify characteristics in groups of
adverse event reports that stand out from the background
events in ‘interesting’ or ‘unexpected’ ways. We will briefly
present potential approaches that use both, statistical and
algorithmic methods to formalize and automate this cognitive paradigm, and will identify open research questions. A
key aspect of this new approach is treating the SRS data
not as a quasi-cohort or sample of the larger universe of
medical product adverse event exposures, but as the universe itself. We further characterize statistically the concept
of adverse event or pattern, and draw connections to other
fields, notably artificial intelligence, applied probability and
machine learning, that can provide some of the fundamental
technology needed to implement these ideas.
This article is meant to be a rather provocative perspective piece, i.e. a beginning piece of research where the
fundamental issues associated with current pharmacovigilance methods are discussed. A case is made pertaining
to the usefulness of SRS data, albeit their limitations, and
a proposed research agenda related to the analysis of SRS
data is outlined. Initial work has indicated the potential
benefits of the new pattern discovery framework for pharmacovigilance practice.

2. CURRENT METHODOLOGIES FOR THE
ANALYSIS OF DATA FOR ADVERSE EVENT
IDENTIFICATION: A CRITICAL APPRAISAL
Data residing in SRS suffer from bias and confounding,
and these drawbacks necessitate the exercise of care when
determining whether or not a causal link exists between
two associated factors. One of the sources of bias in SRS
Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

354

Statistical Analysis and Data Mining, Vol. 7 (2014)

data derives from the fact that the collected data are not
independent of the outcome of interest; this introduces
selection bias that results in the inability to consider the
set of reports residing in SRS as a simple random sample.
Additional biases include those introduced by confounding
and variable amounts of under-reporting. In general, the
current practice of using and drawing inferences from these
data involves informally combining case series analysis,
data mining and external sources of information (e.g.,
toxicological mechanisms). We limit our critique to the
first two components and point out that current data mining
approaches treat SRS as if they were cohorts assembled
for an epidemiological study, when in fact they are simply
an assemblage of individual cases from a very diverse set
of clinical experiences that are, for the most part, without
direct connections. While the extreme biases present in
the data are acknowledged, the data mining techniques
used largely ignore them. Safety signals generated in this
way still must be analyzed using the case series approach.
We believe this serial, dichotomous approach to the data
can be unified through formalizing the pattern discovery
paradigm.
Different statistical approaches used in SRS data include
disproportionality analyses, sequential probability ratio procedures, multivariate regression analyses, and Bayes and
empirical Bayes methods. Most of the published experience to date has been with disproportionality analyses; the
precise operational details of each disproportionality algorithm vary, but all algorithms compute surrogate observedto-expected ratios in which the reporting experience of
each drug-event or vaccine-event, combination is compared
with the background reporting experience across all/most
drugs/vaccines and events using an independence model.
In the appropriate clinical context, the drug/vaccine-event
combinations that stand out statistically against the background reporting experience may reflect credible signals
that require further investigation. Current disproportionality methods have the potential of very poor performance in
real-world databases [20]. This poor performance mainly
stems from the fact that many disproportionality methods use low-dimensional projections of the data, creating
a very large number of 2 × 2 tables. With large databases,
the chance of obtaining imbalanced or severely imbalanced
2 × 2 tables creates uncertainty about the true value of the
measure of association, despite the often very large numbers of reports. Moreover, if a hypothesis testing approach
is adopted, given the very large number of reports statistical significance can be achieved despite the nonexistence
of true associations. In ref. 21, a solution to these problems
is presented. An additional drawback, related to the issue
of observing statistical significance versus scientific significance, is the nonexistence of universal thresholds defining
a potential signal although some have been recommended,
Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

e.g. proportional reporting ratio (PRR) greater than or equal
to 2 [22].
Other methods that have been used are various Bayesian
approaches, which are useful for shrinking the estimate
of the reporting ratio. Among those, the ones that are
used more often are the Gamma-Poisson Shrinker (GPS)
and the MGPS. Another algorithm in use is the Bayesian
confidence propagation neural network (BCPNN) [23]. All
of these methods place a prior distribution on reporting
ratios that encapsulates the prior belief that most reporting
ratios are close to one. The prior distribution is specified in
a variety of ways, and these approaches produce a posterior
distribution for each reporting ratio, i.e. a combination of
prior belief and information provided by the data. However,
Bayesian and empirical Bayes methods, particularly those
based on regression modeling, assume exchangeability that
may be difficult to verify in practice. Furthermore, these
methods do not receive immunity from concerns about
nonrandom sampling and the characteristics of the various
shrinkage mechanisms, to the best of our knowledge,
are generally unknown. Model-based approaches require
modeling assumptions; regression models assume linearity
which may or may not be appropriate. The point here is that
current methods do not incorporate the sampling scheme
that has produced the reports in the SRS.
Recently, the field of biomedical informatics is contributing to the adverse event literature with papers dedicated
to the development of algorithms and systems for adverse
event identification. In ref. 24, a systematic review is carried out to evaluate the accuracy of electronic adverse drug
event detection; the study reported that the systems used
to carry out this task are based on inaccurate detection
algorithms, immature underlying information systems, and
variable methods for detection rule validation. Additional
challenges include inconsistency in the definition of adverse
events [25,26], differences in the codes used to represent
diagnoses, and inconsistency of methods for defining the
gold standard.
Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership (OMOP)
is a public–private partnership between Pharmaceutical
Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA), Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Foundation for
the National Institutes of Health; it is an interdisciplinary
research entity created in 2008 with the goal of identifying
the most reliable methods to analyze massive volumes
of data drawn from heterogeneous sources aiming at
improving the safety of medical products. Ryan et al. [27]
report results on the empirical assessment of methods
for risk identification in the OMOP health database
network. Information and the research performed thus far
by OMOP investigators can be accessed at http://omop.
fnih.org.Reisch et al. [28] address the inconsistency in the
standardization of clinical terminologies across different

Markatou and Ball: A Pattern Discovery Framework for Spontaneous Reporting Systems

healthcare databases in the OMOP project by developing
mapping tables that convert ICD-9-CM diagnosis codes to
MedDRA and SNOMED-CT codes.
Furthermore, there are numerous nuances and pitfalls in
systematic validations of the performance characteristics of
the various algorithms of automated signal detection. These
include: (i) lack of standardized data mining procedures,
e.g. selection and combination of adverse events terms,
numerical thresholds, or dictionary hierarchy thresholds;
(ii) variations in database and dictionary architectures; and
(iii) data quality issues, e.g. data subject to measurement
error (uncertain data) in addition to multiple biases and
confounding factors discussed above.
Currently, none of the existing methods for adverse event
identification in SRS is a reference method while some
of them are used by monitoring agencies for national or
international databases. For instance, the PRR is used for
screening in the European database, the reporting odds ratio
(ROR) in the Dutch database, the information component
(IC) is used by the Uppsala Monitoring Center for the World
Health Organization database, and the MGPS is used by the
USFDA.
A recent study by Huang and coworkers [15] compared
three methods, PRR, BCPNN, and a newly proposed
method in that article, LRT. Interestingly, the article
states that it was not possible to includeMGPS in the
simulation study due to computational complexity, but
it is included in the examples used in the article. The
comparison shows that the number and type of adverse
events identified by each method is different, and there is an
overlap between the events identified. Furthermore, not all
identified events are true adverse effects. Furthermore, some
recent studies [29–32] provide further evidence related
to performance characteristics of data mining methods.
The aforementioned works review the various methods
currently applied to SRS data, discuss their performance
characteristics, and acknowledge the fact that no specific
method is superior to other methods. Therefore, a careful
investigation of the data characteristics that allow successful
application of each method is needed.
The aforementioned literature indicates a number of
limitations of the approaches taken for adverse event
identification. We note here that simulation studies that
compare all methods and that use consistent criteria for
evaluating their performance are rare [33]. The advantages
of method comparison using simulation are well known,
in that the investigator controls the status of the eventmedical product association. However, it is difficult to
judge the appropriateness of the two simulation approaches
currently employed. The first method creates a model of the
‘real world’ of medical product–adverse event experience,
including some drugs that cause adverse effects with a
user-defined relative risk. The simulated SRS is generated

355

by assuming that certain proportions of adverse events
are actually reported. Lack of complete understanding of
these proportions makes this an educated guess. The second
type of model is built using actual SRS data and using
randomized products of marginal proportions to create the
null database with medical product–adverse effect pairs
generated from a statistical model to match the overall
characteristics of the actual SRS data [33,34]. But this
reliance on actual data and pairwise generation makes
it unclear if the simulated data is a sufficiently detailed
representation of the complexity of the SRS.

3.

CASE-BASED REASONING (CBR) AND
SIMILARITY

The first step in the case-series analysis central to
traditional pharmacovigilance is the establishment of the
case definition used for identification of similar cases in
the SRS database. Recognizing the need to improve the
efficiency of case-based approaches in pharmacovigilance
and the limitations of current statistical data mining
approaches, a first step in improving these processes is
the application of algorithms for finding similar cases
using rule-based case definitions. We introduce the Brighton
collaboration case definition of anaphylaxis as an example.
Anaphylaxis is an acute, life-threatening, hypersensitivity
reaction with multi-organ system involvement. It may
occur following exposure to allergens from a variety of
sources including vaccination [35–39]. Its case definition
is formulated to reflect various levels of diagnostic
certainty [35], and documentation of its symptoms and
signs may vary considerably.
The case definition includes three levels of uncertainty
with level 1 being maximally specific but not very
sensitive, level 2 being more sensitive and less specific, and
level 3 being maximally sensitive and minimally specific.
Each level defines different patterns of manifestation of
anaphylaxis. The case definition also describes the major
and minor criteria that are used for the diagnosis of
anaphylaxis while various combinations of major and minor
criteria comprise the different levels of diagnostic certainty.
For example, level 1 of diagnostic certainty is defined
by the presence of one or more major dermatologic or
mucosal symptoms and one or more major cardiovascular
symptoms and/or one of more major respiratory symptoms,
exhibiting already complex patterns of diagnosis and multiorgan involvement (Tables 1 and 2).
As an example, some of the dermatologic criteria that enter the definition of anaphylaxis are generalized urticaria (hives), generalized erythema, localized
angioedema, and generalized angioedema. These can be
represented mathematically by binary random variables that
Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

356

Statistical Analysis and Data Mining, Vol. 7 (2014)
Table 1.

Spontaneous reporting systems [40–45]

Spontaneous reporting system

Products

Available data elements

U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) and Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC)
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting
System (VAERS)

U.S. licensed vaccines

U.S. FDA Adverse Event Reporting
System (FAERS)
European Medicines Agency (EMA)
Eudravigilance

U.S. licensed drugs and therapeutic
biologics
Drugs and biologics
A joint effort between the EMA and
National Competent Authorities to
strengthen the conduct of
pharmacovigilance in the European
Economic Area.
Drugs and biologics

Minimum information includes at least one
identifiable patient, one identifiable reporter,
one reaction/event, and one suspect drug
Other data elements describing the case might
include: patient characteristics (e.g., age,
weight, height, sex, medical history);
reaction(s)/event(s) (description of event,
date/time of start/end of event, time interval
from exposure to start of event); results of tests
and procedures relevant to the investigation of
the patient; drug(s) information, and narrative
case summary and further information

Japanese Pharmaceuticals and Medical
Devices Agency Individual Case
Safety Report database
WHO Upsalla Monitoring Center
VigiBase™

Table 2.

Drugs and biologics
WHO global ICSR database consists of
reports of adverse reactions received from
more than 80 member countries

Case definition of anaphylaxis

For all levels of diagnostic certainty
Anaphylaxis is a clinical syndrome characterized by
• Sudden onset and
• Rapid progression of signs and symptoms and
• Involving multiple (≥ 2) organ systems, as follows
Level 1 of diagnostic certainty
• ≥1 major dermatological and
• ≥1 major cardiovascular and/or ≥1 major respiratory criterion
Level 2 of diagnostic certainty
• ≥1 major cardiovascular and ≥1 major respiratory criterion or
• ≥1 major cardiovascular or respiratory criterion and
• ≥1 minor criterion involving ≥1 different systems (other than
cardiovascular and respiratory systems) or
• (≥1 major dermatologic) and (≥1 minor cardiovascular and/or
minor respiratory criterion)
Level 3 of diagnostic certainty
• ≥1 minor cardiovascular or respiratory criterion and
• ≥1 minor criterion from each of ≥2 different
systems/categories

indicate the occurrence or nonoccurrence of any of the
aforementioned symptoms. Similarly, we represent the cardiovascular symptoms by binary random variables indicating the presence or absence of these events with range
space the set {0, 1}. Weights can also be applied to the
variables.
The Brighton Collaboration case definition has been
implemented as a rule-based program and using features
representing the clinical concepts extracted from narrative
case descriptions, this program has worked reasonably well
to classify cases [46]. But the process of translating case
definitions into computer algorithms is laborious. One can
Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

assess the similarity of the reports to the case definition
of anaphylaxis (as represented by the terms in Table 3)
using the cosine measure that is easy to compute, albeit
very simplistic and lacking inferential basis. Surprisingly,
however, and in the case of anaphylaxis, cosine similarity
works as well as the rule-based case definition using
MedDRA PT’s for classification of possible anaphylaxis
reports in VAERS database [47].
We note that case definitions are also important in caseCBR, an artificial intelligence paradigm that has been used
to build medical decision support systems [17]. The same
idea appears in comparative effectiveness research studies,
where matching techniques are used to create the groups of
subjects to be compared [18].
Another algorithmic approach treats the SRS (and in our
case VAERS) as a dynamic network of medical products
and MedDRA PT’s describing medical concepts [48]. Patterns emerge by applying algorithms to reduce the network
to identify highly correlated subnetworks. Many different algorithms have been proposed for identifying clusters
of highly connected nodes within a network. One such
approach that successfully identified the ‘IS’ cluster in networks constructed from reports of adverse events associated
with the RotaShield vaccine, selected those edges connecting MedDRA preferred terms (PTs) and vaccines with
weights above a threshold set at the third quartile of the
distribution for the particular network [48]. These patterns
represent combinations of PTs that an experienced clinician can recognize as clinical conditions, such as IS [48].
Another algorithm that identifies nodes that are connected in
‘triangles’ was used to identify the pattern of PTs that make

Markatou and Ball: A Pattern Discovery Framework for Spontaneous Reporting Systems

357

Table 3. Major and Minor criteria used in the case definition of
anaphylaxis
MAJOR CRITERIA
Dermatologic or mucosal: Generalized urticarial (hives) or
generalized erythema, angioedema (localized or generalized),
and generalized pruritus with skin rash.
Cardiovascular: measured hypotension, clinical diagnosis of
uncompensated shock, indicated by the combination of at least
three of the following: tachycardia, capillary refill time >3 s,
reduced central pulse volume, decreased level of
consciousness or loss of consciousness.
Respiratory: bilateral wheeze (bronchospasm), stridor, upper
airway swelling (lip, tongue, throat, uvula, or larynx),
respiratory distress and two or more of the following:
tachypnea, increased use of accessory respiratory muscles
(sterocleidomastoid, intercostals, etc.), recession, cyanosis,
grunting.
MINOR CRITERIA
Dermatologic or mucosal: generalized pruritus without skin
rash, generalized prickle sensation, localized injection site
urticaria, red and itchy eyes.
Cardiovascular: reduced peripheral circulation as indicated by
the combination of at least 2 of tachycardia and a capillary
refill time of >3 s without hypotension or a decreased level of
consciousness.
Respiratory: persistent dry cough, hoarse voice, difficulty
breathing without wheeze or stridor, sensation of throat
closure, sneezing, rhinorrhea.
Gastrointestinal: diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting.
Laboratory: mast cell tryptase elevation> upper normal limit

up anaphylaxis [49]. Figure 1 is a network representation of
a pattern obtained from a set of reports representing possible
anaphylaxis reports after the 2009 H1N1 influenza vaccine.
This initial work relied on the spontaneous formation of
networks based on the same MedDRA PT or vaccine being
present in different reports. It is possible that either using
the MedDRA hierarchy or an external ontology to normalize differential coding of the same medical concept in different reports might strengthen the clustering within a network. The most direct approach might normalize the initial
coding of reports using the National Library of Medicine’s
MetaMap tool and the Unified Medical Language System
(UMLS) Metathesaurus. An alternative might be to apply
a comprehensive set of case definition representations or
Structured MedDRA Queries to the reports using a similarity measure and then build networks of similar reports.
A key concept of network analysis is preferential attachment [50]. The preferential attachment model says that networks grow by attaching new entrants to existing nodes
according to the number of existing attachments a node
already has. Recent work differentiates preferential attachment into two components: popularity and similarity [51].
If we were to apply this model to the SRS data, popular nodes would be most commonly reported medical
products or PT terms (e.g., fever is reported commonly
after many vaccines). Similar nodes, however, are nodes

Fig. 1 Anaphylaxis reported after influenza vaccines in VAERS.
The figure shows the most common MedDRA preferred terms (PT;
circles) included in reports of possible anaphylaxis after receipt of
the 2009 H1N1 and seasonal influenza vaccines (squares). Lines
connect PTs and vaccines that co-occur in at least one report.
Dark red circles represent PTs describing signs and symptoms in
the Brighton Collaboration (BC) case definition for anaphylaxis.
Grey circles are PTs not related to the BC definition. The complex
interrelationships among signs and symptoms that give rise to a
complex clinical condition like anaphylaxis represent a pattern that
can be detected by an experienced clinician (adapted from ref. 49)
119 × 88 mm (300 × 300 DPI) [Color figure can be viewed in
the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]

that form natural clusters (e.g., PTs representing gastrointestinal symptoms in cases of IS), that may or may not be
popular. It is these groups of similar nodes that are likely
to be of greatest interest to the clinical reviewer, and algorithms to detect them validly and reliably are of greatest
interest. This concept will be described Section 4.
Such algorithmic approaches to identify similar cases of
interest in SRS offer a first step in automating a case-based
framework. However, they lack the statistical framework
that allows inferential rigor that is necessary for truly valid
and reproducible automated assessment of SRS data. In the
following sections, we introduce a statistical pattern discovery framework that characterizes statistically the concept of
signal, and incorporates a preprocessing step and a modeling step. The preprocessing is based on well-accepted case
definitions of adverse events, coded as PT terms, and uses
those to provide a representation of the adverse event. The
modeling step is based on appropriately constructed probability distribution models that aim to provide a description
of the relationships between PT terms that comprise the
adverse event.
4.

A PATTERN DISCOVERY FRAMEWORK

The pattern discovery framework summarizes succinctly
and concretely the different steps of the pharmacovigilance
Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

358

Statistical Analysis and Data Mining, Vol. 7 (2014)

process. Pattern discovery is aided by case definitions
when these exist and it is statistical in nature when case
definitions do not exist. Furthermore, it allows probabilistic
and graphical modeling thereby allowing probabilistic
inference. In what follows, we discuss first the concept of a
signal or pattern, and then formalize it to aid identification.
4.1.

What Is a ‘Signal’?

The literature on the definition of the concept of
‘signal’ in pharmacovigilance is quite revealing. First, the
general pharmacoepidemiologic literature uses the word
‘signal’ mostly without a specific, well-stated definition.
A report by the CIOMS/WHO Working Group on Vaccine
Pharmacovigilance, entitled ‘Definition and Application of
Terms for Vaccine Pharmacovigilance’ [52] states that a
major challenge to assessing and communicating safety
is the lack of a standard vocabulary of definitions of the
various terms used.
Works that address specifically the question of signal
definition are scarce and those existing in the literature are
diverse [53]. The definitions are descriptive in nature and
contain divergent elements, thereby leaving the door open
to misinterpretations.
Lack of clear and agreed upon definitions obstructs the
development of conceptual frameworks that are needed to
witness advancement in safety research [25]. However, formulating a definition of concepts such as ‘signal’ in pharmacovigilance can be quite difficult because of the complexity of the task. The process of pharmacovigilance, as it
is practiced today, involves a variety of aspects including
probabilistic, thus quantifiable, aspects as well as subjective aspects. To some extent, it is not surprising that a
completely quantitative definition does not exist. In this
subsection, we first review the existing definitions of a ‘signal’ and then attempt to quantify those aspects amenable to
quantification.
One important definition of the concept of ‘signal’ is
given by WHO. In ref. 52, ‘signal’ is defined as ‘Reported
information on a possible causal relationship between an
adverse event and a drug, the relationship being unknown
or incompletely documented’. Lindquist [25] reported that a
‘signal’ is an evaluated association that is considered important to investigate further, it may refer to new information
on an already known association, and that usually more than
a single report is required to generate a signal, depending
on the seriousness of the event and the quality of the information. This last requirement is important, as it associates
the concept of a ‘signal’ with uncertainty reduction.
There are other definitions put forward by various groups.
A revised and expanded definition of the concept of ‘signal’
has been put forward by CIOMS Working Group VIII [52].
The concept of signal is defined as ‘Information that
Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

arises from one or multiple sources (including observations
and experiments), which suggests a new potentially causal
association, or a new aspect of a known association,
between an intervention and an event or set of related
events, either adverse or beneficial, that is judged to be
of sufficient likelihood to justify verificatory action’. The
aforementioned definition of the concept of ‘signal’ is a
modification of the definition proposed by Hauben and
Aronson [53]; these authors presented a thoughtful analysis
of the concept of ‘signal’ and a definition for this concept
which they argued reflects real-world pharmacovigilance
processes, and that accommodates signals of both harmful
and beneficial effects. Furthermore, they discuss various
subtypes of ‘signal’ in an attempt to provide a definition
that is as specific as possible.
Finally, USFDA [19] states that ‘. . . safety signal refers
to a concern about an excess of adverse events compared to
what would be expected to be associated with a product’s
use. Signals can arise from premarketing data and other
sources, such as preclinical data and events associated
with other products in the same pharmacologic class. It is
possible that even a single well-documented case report can
be viewed as a signal, particularly if the report describes a
positive re-challenge or if the event is extremely rare in the
absence of drug use. Signals generally indicate the need
for further investigation, which may or may not lead to
the conclusion that the product caused the event. After the
signal is identified it should be further assessed to determine
whether it represents a potential safety risk and whether
other action should be taken’.
A striking characteristic of all the aforementioned definitions is that they are descriptive despite the presence
of objective and quantifiable aspects. Objective elements
include the notion of probability, the notion of rarity, as
well as the notions of causality, novelty, importance, and
interestingness. We will attempt to quantify some of these
aspects by offering first a quantitative definition of the concept of a ‘signal’ as a ‘pattern’, we will characterize statistically this concept and discuss inferential aspects associated
with it.
4.2.

What Is a Pattern?

Traditional methods of signal detection depend on
clinical recognition of an unusual or unexpected pattern
of events, or a pattern of events that is consistent with
a biologically plausible explanation, either within a single
case or across a number of cases.
Pattern discovery is a fundamental data analytic and
inferential task without a sound underlying theory [14]. We
indicate a possible foundation for potential adverse event
identification by discussing the various elements embedded
in the current pharmacovigilance practice and further

Markatou and Ball: A Pattern Discovery Framework for Spontaneous Reporting Systems

connecting those with statistical and information theoretic
concepts. An example from statistics that illustrates the
advantages of a solid theory underlying the technology
is outlier detection [14]. Fundamental concepts such as
distance between distributions, influence function, and
related concepts provide a framework within which one can
discuss, develop, and apply tools for outlier identification.
Although we use the words ‘signal’ and ‘pattern’
interchangeably, ‘pattern’ is a slight extension of ‘signal’
(as defined in Section 5.1) in the following sense. Because
a pattern consists of a set of variables in which all
members are related with each other by a specific rule, the
word ‘pattern’ embodies the characteristics of a ‘signal’
as defined in the literature, as well as it expresses the
probability model that governs the relationships between
these variables, and thus it is an embodiment of information.
DEFINITION (ref. 14): A pattern is a local structure that
generates data with an anomalously high density compared
with that expected under the (global) baseline model, where
‘departure’ from the baseline model is defined in terms of
probability densities.
Thus, patterns are defined by their observed values and
associated relationships. Additional important aspects are
the interpretation of the concept of ‘local’, the selection
of a baseline model, and the definition of ‘anomalously
high’ occurrences [14]. In the previously described network
representation of SRS, the ‘popularity’ would correspond to
the baseline model and ‘similarity’ to the local structure. No
clear definition for ‘anomalously high’ has been established
for the network representation of SRS and hence the need
for a statistically rigorous approach to this question.
Consider a set of random variables {Xi , i = 1, 2, 3, . . . ,
k}, defined on a subset of the sample space. Any subset of
the aforementioned set of random variables constitutes an
event. An extension of the Hand and Bolton [14] definition
of the concept of pattern is as follows.
DEFINITION An instantiation of either the entire family
of random variables {Xi , i = 1, 2, 3, . . . , k} or a subset
of it, in which the random variables are connected via a
probability rule or model is called a pattern.
Here, the pattern is defined not only through the
realizations of the different random variables and in
reference to a global probability model, but also through
their dependence relationships, i.e. the probability model
that describes the relationships of the variables that enter
the definition of a pattern. Next, we present an example,
based on the case definition of anaphylaxis, to introduce
and exemplify the concept of a pattern.
DEFINITION: Any instantiation of a random variable is
called a simple event.
For example, the presence or absence of tachycardia is
a simple event, but the clinical diagnosis of uncompensated shock, which is one of the major criteria aiding the

359

diagnosis of anaphylaxis, is not. This is because the clinical diagnosis of uncompensated shock involves certain
combinations of simple cardiovascular events. Let Yj (1),
j = 1, 2, . . . , 6 indicate the presence of any one of the
six cardiovascular symptoms listed in Table 3; then the
clinical diagnosis of uncompensated shock is expressed by
10 + 5 + 1=16 different patterns, where 10 is the number
of different patterns that correspond to the occurrence of
three cardiovascular events out of the total of five, five is
the number of patterns that correspond to four symptoms
occurring out of total of five, and one is when all five cardiovascular symptoms occurred at once. One such possible
pattern is expressed as Y2 (1)Y3 (1)Y4 (1)Y5 (0)Y6 (0) or simply 11100, where 1 indicates the occurrence of a symptom
and 0 indicates its absence. Thus, Y2 (1) = 1 indicates the
presence of tachycardia, Y3 (1) = 1 indicates the presence of
capillary refill time greater than 3 s, Y4 (1) = 1 indicates the
presence of a reduced central pulse volume, and Y5 (0) = 0,
Y6 (0) = 0 indicate the absence of decreased level of consciousness and loss of consciousness. Notice that the pattern
here is defined by the absence or presence of certain simple events, and, at this stage, is loosely defined. It refers to
only occurrence or nonoccurrence of simple events, without any implication of an underlying model or frequency
of occurrence characteristic.
DEFINITION: Patterns that are represented by a series
of simple events are called composite patterns.
One such composite anaphylactic pattern is the pattern
‘one major dermatological symptom and one major cardiovascular symptom and one major respiratory symptom’.
This pattern, denoted by P has a number of different instantiations, and the cardinality of its range space is 2465.
The above discussion indicates that the concept of pattern is a multivariate concept, in that it is characterized by
the simultaneous occurrence of simple events. Furthermore,
the specific combination of simple patterns almost never
occurs randomly, thus the simultaneous occurrence of
events described by random variables, or in statistical language the dependence structures that are implied by these
patterns, are meaningful. In what follows we will characterize these patterns statistically. Two more points are worth
mentioning. First, in this formulation, there are patterns
that never occur; e.g. the pattern tachycardia, denoted by
Y2 (1) = 1, and capillary refill time greater than 3 s, denoted
by Y3 (1) = 1, expressed as Y2 (1)Y3 (1)Y4 (0)Y5 (0)Y6 (0) or
11000, is a possible pattern but it is not a part of the case
definition of anaphylaxis, which identifies only the significant or interesting patterns that can inform the diagnosis
of anaphylaxis. (note here that the words ‘significant’ and
‘interesting’ are used interchangeably). As a consequence
of the above observation, the search space, particularly in
cases of absence of any kind of guidance that can inform
the search, is really large, indicating that this aspect of the
Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

360

Statistical Analysis and Data Mining, Vol. 7 (2014)

problem is perhaps fundamentally responsible for the proliferation of algorithms that aspire to identify potential adverse
events. The existence of case definitions, such as the anaphylaxis example discussed above, refocuses attention from
blindly searching the space of all patterns to incorporating
knowledge in the search, but most importantly to shifting
attention to fundamental inferential aspects that need to be
addressed.
Secondly, the binary random variables used here to
represent simple patterns, are not independent, as in many
cases, the occurrence of a specific symptom is accompanied
by the occurrence of one or more additional symptoms to
create a composite pattern, indicating specific dependence
structures among these variables.
What are the consequences of expressing patterns in
the aforementioned way? When case definitions of adverse
events exist to aid the identification of reports that are
potential adverse event reports, this representation provides
a vehicle for the identification of similar reports in an automatic way, and may facilitate the construction of probability
models that are able to account for the fact that the data
in SRS are not a simple random sample. Furthermore, the
ability to automatically identify similar cases that meet a
case definition of arbitrary complexity is the first major
step toward reaching our goal of using a pattern discovery framework to combine what is now a two-step process
of statistical data mining and case series analysis. Instead
of applying statistical algorithms to medical products and
MedDRA coding terms in a paired fashion, and then using
ad hoc methods to look for patterns that might represent
safety signals, we have the opportunity to compare similar
cases directly that have clinical characteristics that might
be coded with MedDRA coding terms from many different
MedDRA System Organ Classes. Furthermore, the concept
of similarity quantifies the local characteristic aspect that is
embodies in the definition of a pattern.

5.

STATISTICAL CHARACTERIZATION
OF ADVERSE EVENTS

In pharmacovigilance, there are additional variables,
other than those describing medical symptoms, that are used
to aid the identification of potential adverse event patterns.
These variables may include demographics such as gender,
age, race or ethnicity, biological information, time to onset,
and the length of the window at risk. When symptom
variables are only used to describe a pattern we call this
pattern a prototype or basic pattern. The addition of other
variables expands the concept of pattern and completely
characterizes it. When a pattern is expanded to incorporate
all relevant variables that describe it is called a complete
pattern.
Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

To illustrate the concept of a complete pattern, we refer
to the detection of IS after RotaShield as a safety signal
identified in VAERS. While there is a formal Brighton
collaboration case definition of IS, the observed pattern that
led to the identification of the safety signal included several
additional aspects as described in Section 2.
The formalization of the concept of a pattern offers a
way to identify patterns in spontaneous reports. When case
definitions of adverse events exist and are used to aid
identification, each case is reduced to a sentence further
describing the salient features of the case needed for causal
assessment. For example, ‘4 days after vaccination with
RotaShield, a 4-month-old boy with a history of premature delivery at 34 weeks, developed bloody diarrhea and
was diagnosed with IS by barium enema’. This sentence
describes the time to onset after exposure to medical product of interest, the important demographic characteristics,
alternative explanations (which might include past medical history and other exposures), and a description of the
adverse event, which might include signs and symptoms,
diagnoses, and medical interventions salient to the diagnosis. The summarized case is then translated into the pattern
‘_1110_’, indicating the presence of all fundamental elements to identify an ‘interesting’ case. That is, a case for
which the time to onset after the use of the RotaShield falls
within a time window that is different from other reports
for RotaShield; the age group is unusual for IS; the clinical
description is consistent with the case definition for IS (note
that we have reduced consistency with the case definition
to a binary variable, although in fact it is more complex as
per the previous discussion); and no compelling alternative
explanation is present.
The above discussion indicates that the scale of data that
aid pattern identification is mixed, including both continuous and discrete variables. The variables describing case
definitions are primarily binary random variables indicating the presence or absence of a particular clinical feature. Each additional clinical aspect has either an interval/
ratio or a categorical scale. An example of a variable that
can be either categorical or interval/ratio is the age at which
an adverse event occurs. The time to onset variable is a continuous variable, but different conditions will have intervals
after medical product exposure that are of greater interest.
For example, anaphylaxis due to a medical product exposure will usually occur almost immediately after exposure.
IS after RotaShield, had its peak 3 to 7 days after vaccination. If the pharmacovigilance expert has predefined age and
time windows of interest, then these features can be represented also as binary random variables or can be treated as
continuous random variables, the point being that loss of
information must be avoided.
An important aspect that characterizes statistically patterns of adverse events is the probability with which the

Markatou and Ball: A Pattern Discovery Framework for Spontaneous Reporting Systems

specific pattern of adverse event occurs or the degree of
rarity of the pattern. For example, anaphylaxis occurs very
rarely after vaccination, on the order of 1 per 100 000
vaccinations. The degree of rarity of a pattern is contextdependent and different from the epidemiologic measure of
prevalence that is defined as the proportion of a population
found to carry a given condition. Even if anaphylaxis is
over-represented in SRS data because of biased reporting
(over-reporting), it is still a rare event in the SRS data. In
the case of a potentially novel adverse event, where epidemiologic prevalence is unknown, one may still be able
to estimate a degree of rarity for the potential event relying
on several data sources, and use it to aid the construction,
choice, and performance of identification algorithms, with
rarer events being more difficult to identify.
Patterns of interest are generally rare events occurring
with ‘small’ probability, and a formal definition of what
constitutes a rare event does not exist. Although it
is possible to identify events with high probability of
occurrence, these are not necessarily the events of interest.
Extreme value theory deals with statistical procedures
to analyze the most extreme realizations of a set of
random variables or features that describe an event. Let
the vector xi = (xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xip )T denote the feature
vector associated with the ith subject, i = 1,2, . . . , n, with
distribution F . Regulatory decisions usually rely on the
upper tail of F , and thus to characterize patterns describing
potential adverse events, we will need to accurately estimate
the multivariate extreme quantiles of the distribution F .
When the probability of occurrence p is not too small,
the usual sample quantile provides a satisfactory solution.
But this is not the case when p is very small where rare
events are of interest. An interesting aspect of using the
sample quantiles to define a thresholding system to indicate
the position of the observed pattern in the tail of the
distribution is that it inherently offers a measure of the
‘degree of rarity’ of an event that is interpretable and easily
understood. The difficult part of this characterization is
derived from the fact that there may be different notions of
multivariate quantiles, and there are theoretical difficulties
associated with the evaluation of the performance of the
estimators of extreme upper quantiles, particularly in high
dimensions. In ref. 54. an application of extreme value
theory in aviation to address safety issues associated with
the airline industry by constructing a thresholding system
based on the concept of a multivariate extreme quantile is
presented. This formulation of the problem provides for a
conceptual framework that allows one to think about the
challenges in adverse event identification and risk/multiple
risk assessment and constitutes an approach worth thinking
about when applying it in the context of health.
The patterns that describe the anaphylaxis adverse event
are based on a relatively well-accepted case definition for

361

anaphylaxis. In many situations, there is a lack of wellaccepted case definitions as well as a lack of general
knowledge that can inform completely the identification of
patterns of adverse events. In such cases, one would like to
be able to identify the important variables from a potentially
very large set of variables that contribute toward the creation of a causal pattern. But even if causality is a statistical
characterization of an adverse event pattern, establishing
causality of the relationship between the observed pattern
and the medical product under consideration is not straightforward. A systematic review of the methods for assessing
causality of adverse event drug reactions is given in ref. 55.

6. IDENTIFICATION OF SIMILAR CASE
REPORTS AND PROBABILISTIC INFERENCE
Given a case report, or a set of case reports, how can one
identify other similar case reports automatically, validly,
and reproducibly? In order to answer this question, we first
need to define a suitable measure of similarity/dissimilarity
and then evoke an algorithm based on this measure, to
identify the similar reports. An important consideration is
the required ‘degree of similarity’, as it characterizes the
properties that this measure ought to exhibit. We propose
the use of appropriately constructed similarity or distance
functions that are able to offer a quantification of the
concept of ‘degree of similarity’. These functions may then
be used in a clustering algorithm to identify relevant reports.
A broad definition of similarity exists in the philosophical
literature since Hellenic times, where similarity is usually
understood as the fidelity of property conservation between
an object and its reference. There is an extensive literature
on various measures of similarity in a variety of scientific
fields including psychology [56], computer vision, bioinformatics, information retrieval, natural language processing,
and statistics [57,58]. In ref. 59, the earth mover’s distance
has been used for the purpose of measuring similarity in
object recognition problems, whereas the cosine similarity between term frequency–inverse documents frequency
(tf-idf) vectors is used in information retrieval.
Despite the substantial amount of work on similarity
measures, the issue of identifying an appropriate measure for the task in-hand is not trivial and requires further
research. The measure’s required properties will characterize the relationships between the measure and important
aspects of the problem under consideration. In our case, as
reports are represented by vectors of 0s and 1s for carrying
out the identification task automatically, we need a measure s(ri , rj ) that is greater than or equal to 0 and is
defined on {0, 1}L × {0, 1}L , where L is the length of
the vectors representing two different reports. Furthermore,
even if we represent reports by 0s and 1s, underlying this
Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

362

Statistical Analysis and Data Mining, Vol. 7 (2014)

representation is a medical diagnosis that is based on a set
of symptoms, signs, and laboratory values that is potentially associated with any given disease. Thus, the 0, 1
assignment indicating the absence or presence of a given
symptom, sign, or laboratory abnormality ought to be differentially weighted to indicate the strength of information
provided by it. For example, diagnostic codes may merit
higher weight that codes associated with the absence or
presence of other signs and symptoms. How to select these
weights is an open problem.
Traditional similarity measures often generate a score
for a pair of cases by examining how much information
is shared between them. In ref. 47, a deterministic measure
of similarity, the cosine between two vector representations
of the anaphylaxis pattern, is used to identify reports that
potentially contain adverse events. A better approach is to
use a similarity measure that depends on the probability
of occurrence of the features within the world of the
spontaneous reports; this will allow the machinery of
rigorous statistical inference to be brought to bear on the
problem, improving the validity and reproducibility of the
similarity results. For an interesting measure of similarity
that reflects this dependence, see ref. 17.
Current literature in machine learning [60,61] attempts
to address the question of what constitutes a good similarity function, but it only takes into account computational considerations. Subject-matter considerations, understanding of the statistical properties of these measures,
interpretability, and transparency of computation considerations need to be taken into account. We need procedures that are sensitive enough to allow discovery of
reports that contain potentially new adverse events that
escape discovery in the preclinical phase of the product, but, at the same time, are specific enough to be
able to identify potential safety issues with a very high
confidence. These subject-matter requirements must be
reflected in the choice and properties of the similarity/
distance measure.
The identified significant event patterns form a basis
for constructing an inference model. If one has a large
database at disposal, albeit all the data limitations, the
marginal distributions of simple patterns can be estimated.
For example, tachycardia is represented by a Bernoulli
random variable and historical data are available to compute
the percentage of reports that include the presence/absence
of tachycardia and are declared as anaphylactic. Thus,
the probability of occurrence, pi , of the ith simple event
that enters the definition of the pattern can be estimated.
However, the different simple patterns are not necessarily
independent as they indicate symptoms that usually appear
together to form the diagnostic pattern of the adverse event
(e.g., a limitation of current similarity measures is that
they do not account for this lack of independence). This
Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

provides us with random variables with known marginal
distributions, and the statistical problem is to find the
joint probability distribution of these random variables that
have the given marginal distributions. A potentially useful
way to model dependence between variables is to use
copulas. Copulas are functions that connect multivariate
distributions to their one-dimensional marginal [62], and
have been proven useful in a variety of modeling situations,
such as in survival analysis [63,64]. A simple example is
the copula C(u, v) = uv, that corresponds to independence.
A joint distribution can be written as F (x) = C(F1 (x1 ),
. . . , Fm (xm )), where Fi , i = 1, 2, . . . , m are the marginal
distributions and C is a given copula function.
The first step in copula estimation is to specify and
estimate the univariate marginal distributions. In this
context, these marginal are Bernoulli distributions and,
they can presumably be estimated from the database. The
better the fit of the marginal the more precisely we can
model the dependence structure. The second step requires
specification of a copula. Because the dependence structure
is completely unknown, a relatively unrestrictive copula is
a sensible choice. Trying several copulas to explore the
dependence structure also constitutes a sound strategy. The
main advantage of this approach is that it enables one to
divide the construction of multivariate probability models
into two parts, one containing the marginal distributions
and another containing the dependence structure. These two
parts can be estimated separately and then rejoined via
the copula to form a multivariate distribution accounting
for the fact that data are not a simple random sample,
i.e. accounting for selection bias [65,66]. Further work is
needed to assess the feasibility of use of copula models
of dependence in the context of pharmacovigilance and a
number of challenges need to be addressed. These include
selecting appropriate families of copula models for the data,
effect of sparseness of data on the estimation of parameters,
potentially high dimensions, and the fact that the marginals
may be discrete or mixed type.

7.

A PROPOSED RESEARCH AGENDA

To advance the ideas described in this article, we suggest a research agenda in three areas: statistical methodology development, informatics, and pharmacovigilance
operations.

7.1.

Statistical Methodology Development

The challenges that need to be addressed to further
develop the pattern discovery framework proposed here are
as follows.

Markatou and Ball: A Pattern Discovery Framework for Spontaneous Reporting Systems

7.1.1. Construction/identification of similarity/distance
measures with inferential capabilities and well-understood
statistical properties
The full development of the pattern discovery framework
in SRS requires the creation of methods to automatically
apply first current knowledge to organize adverse event
report data into recognizable patterns that can be analyzed;
it also requires further development of methods that can
identify interesting patterns in a manner similar to a
clinicians’ cognitive framework. A first step in this process
is to identify similar cases through the automatic application
of case definitions. This action, at this stage, eliminates the
step of identifying relevant variables that enter the definition
of a pattern, as case definitions already provide those.
While initial steps in this direction have been taken [17,47],
the inferential capabilities of these algorithms is either
questionable or not well understood. The application of
similarity/distance functions presents two challenges. One
is to determine a suitable threshold value; the difficulty
here arises from the fact that the distribution of the score
values obtained by a similarity function may be completely
different from the distribution obtained by another. The
second is how to select and/or measure which function
is more adequate than another for a given dataset. In the
context of pharmacovigilance where the identification of
rare events is important, efficient measures for automatic
pattern discovery are needed. In the case of small samples
one must be extremely careful in labeling identified variable
combinations as potential signals. This is the case where the
concept of a pattern and the pattern discovery approach
is most useful. If the identified pattern fits the case
definition or if it is possible to identify a group of similar
cases, the evidence for the presence of a potential adverse
event is strengthened. The identification of a potential
adverse event pattern depends, of course, on the cutoff
value that is used and that depends on the distribution of
the similarity measure. Therefore, the study of similarity
measures along with their statistical properties, constitute
an important step in developing rigorously the proposed
framework.
7.1.2. Standards for the evaluation of algorithms based
on similarity/distance measures
Standards for evaluation of algorithms fall into two
categories. The first is identification of known signals in real
databases. The second is using simulated datasets [34,67].
While identification of real signals in the ultimate test of
any algorithm, the retrospective testing is made complicated
by the lack of complete and precise characterization of what
constitutes ‘true positives’ and ‘true negatives’. Ideally,
use of simulated data sets solves the problem, but only
if the simulation fully generates the SRS in an unbiased

363

fashion. To date, two types of simulation models have been
proposed and it is not clear that either fully meets this test.
The metrics for success remain to be determined. While
false discovery rate has been proposed [68], this equally
weighs the prevention of false-positive and false-negative
signaling, but different organizations and circumstances
might drive other preferences.
7.1.3. Development of models for the analysis of SRS
data that account for the nonrandomness of SRS data
Because SRSs play, and will continue to play, an
important role in the evaluation of safety of medical
products, there is a need to create models that account
for the nonrandomness of the data. Current models,
frequentist or Bayesian, do not account for the fact that
SRS data are not simple random samples. Earlier and
relatively newer research in statistical sciences [69–71] and
the econometric literature [72,73] can potentially provide
guidance for the construction of models that account for
selection bias.
A primary technique for removing biases such as age or
gender-related is via stratification. However, stratification
requires enumeration of important covariates, and there
is no guarantee that all these covariates are known
and/or even measured. De Stavola and Cox [74] discuss
the consequences of over-stratification in observational
studies, stating that over-stratification may lower precision;
however, under-stratification risks bias. An alternative to
stratification is propensity scoring that imposes a linear
logistic regression model structure [75,76]. Although the
use of these techniques allows for controlling some
types of bias, it does not account for nonrandomness of
the sample.
7.2.

Informatics

In addition to the statistical research that is focused
primarily on improving the rigor of inference in the
identification of patterns in SRS, further development of
informatics strategies to automatically extract and organize
the relevant features of SRS data are needed. We would
like to note that the identification of relevant variables for
pattern definition should be statistically based. Research
directions with both immediate practical payoff and longerterm concepts with links to fundamental informatics issues
are outlined below.
7.2.1. Development of automated case definitions (e.g.,
the remaining Brighton collaboration case definitions)
The automation of the remaining Brighton collaboration case definitions using approaches discussed in this
Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

364

Statistical Analysis and Data Mining, Vol. 7 (2014)

perspective would be of immediate benefit for medical product safety surveillance, would provide additional
examples for evaluating similarity/distance measures, and
would likely uncover new informatics challenges because
of the complexity of characterizing a range of clinical
conditions.
7.2.2. Establish the best ways to extract diagnostic
features from individual case safety reports (ICSR’s)
Establishing the best means to extract diagnostic features
whether it is through improved ontologies (e.g., MedDRA)
or text mining, or better methods for automatically identifying medical concept synonyms, is important for assuring
the accurate characterization of complex clinical patterns.
7.2.3. Improve methods to extract temporal relationships
Improving methods for extracting temporal relationships
in ICSR’s among medical product exposures, adverse
events of interest, and alternative explanations or mitigating
factors, using natural language processing would allow the
characterization of temporal patterns, in addition to clinical
ones.
7.3.

Pharmacovigilance Operations

After addressing the aforementioned challenges, the best
performing methods should be evaluated in an operational
pharmacovigilance framework. The goals of this phase
of research would be to evaluate the performance of the
new methods against current methods considered to be
the state of the art, which are described in the following
sections.
7.3.1. Generation of simulated and real datasets from a
variety of SRSs with true positives and negatives
Identification of the most appropriate simulation method
for SRS (see ref. 67) and a standardized set of truepositive and true-negative medical product–adverse event
relationships for a range of SRSs and medical products is
still needed to accomplish this goal. While the OMOP has
taken steps in this direction, a comprehensive test set of
medical product–adverse events that encompasses the full
spectrum of both products and adverse events is needed,
and it also needs to be adapted to the SRS context. While
currently common outcome measures include sensitivity,
specificity, and area under the ROC curve, additional
research on what metrics are most appropriate and in
whether it depends on the particular setting (e.g., regulatory
agency, manufacturer, and academic researcher) would be
beneficial.
Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

7.3.2. Evaluation of validity and reproducibility of
findings
Comparison of algorithms currently in practice, such as
disproportionality DMAs with new methods that implement
the pattern discovery approach, is needed. This can be
performed incrementally or comprehensively. For example,
it would be possible now to use existing similarity measures
([17, 47]) to classify all reports in an SRS into groups
of reports representing similar medical terms or concepts.
Existing DMAs could be applied to these recoded SRS
databases rather than to individual MedDRA PTs as is now
the practice. This would provide more clinical specificity
over sector ‘heat’ maps that present data for a particular
medical product across all MedDRA system organ classes
as a means of representing an overview of the adverse event
profile of a medical product. As additional algorithms based
on probabilistic similarity measures are developed, e.g.
kernel algorithms based on copulas, more comprehensive
tests could be conducted.
7.3.3. Development and testing of user-friendly prototype
software tools in operational pharmacovigilance
environments
In addition to validity and reproducibility of findings for
pharmacovigilance practice, it is important to know whether
the pattern discovery framework improves staff efficiency
in actual operations. The best performing methods need
to be included in software that fits into the workflow of
pharmacovigilance organizations. Relatively little research
has been conducted on the characteristics of such software
but is critical to better understand how different aspects
of the software tools, e.g. visualization of findings, can
be optimized, so human expertize can be focused less
on data summarization and more on judgment about the
implications of safety findings.
7.4.

Stakeholders in the Proposed Research Agenda

A wide range of scientific disciplines are needed to carry
out the methodological work described above including
statisticians, epidemiologists, clinicians, biomedical informaticists, and computer scientists. While medical product
regulatory and public health agencies and the pharmaceutical industry would likely be the heaviest users of an
improved approach to spontaneous report evaluation, the
underlying concepts are broadly applicable to analysis of
electronic medical records and other document-based networks. This suggests that other government agencies such
as the National Science Foundation, the National Library of
Medicine, and the Office of the National Coordinator for
Health Information Technology in the United States might
also have a role to play in encouraging this work.

Markatou and Ball: A Pattern Discovery Framework for Spontaneous Reporting Systems

8.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this article, we identify some of the limitations of
current pharmacovigilance methods applied to SRS and propose a pattern recognition framework as part of the solution.
We discuss the need for concentration on conceptual and
inferential aspects of the process of adverse event discovery
and emphasize the need to automate certain aspects of this
process. Deeper acknowledgment of the potential for violation of the assumptions underlying the application of current
statistical DMAs to SRS data is needed for further development of valid inferential methods. This requires a deeper
understanding and incorporation of the reporting biases into
the analysis, a difficult problem that is an extreme version
of the general problem of analysis of observational data.
What are the potential advantages of the approach
described in this article for pharmacovigilance practice?
The primary goal is to improve the rigor with which
inferences can be made from SRS data. At present, when
algorithms are applied to SRS data and performance
characteristics are measured, we cannot be confident that
these performance characteristics will apply to another SRS
database or even the same SRS database after additional
cases accrue. Recent work presented in ref. 77 evaluates
the impact of the heterogeneity that different databases
exhibit on the results obtained when data from these
databases are used for safety analysis purposes. But there
are also other more practical potential gains that would
likely increase the efficiency of SRS reviewers and reduce
the amount of time, and resources experts need to apply
to data aggregation and summarization, so more time
can be spent on data assessment and decision making.
Currently, much human expert labor is required to assess
the clinical characteristics of reports. For example, this
often requires the application of case definitions by human
medical experts. If cases can be automatically classified as
representing a certain type of case, or automatically grouped
into similar clinical categories, this information could be
presented to the reviewing expert, with a great increase in
efficiency. Extending such automatic grouping to include
cases with similar time-to-onset after the exposure, or with
similar medical histories, would be of even greater benefit.
Being able to identify whether such cases are also more
‘interesting’ than other reported cases in a statistically
rigorous way, would allow reviewers to further focus their
attention on matters of judgment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Marianthi Markatou acknowledges support from FDASOL-1084-978A. Robert Ball is a full-time FDA employee
and conducted this work as part of his employment.

365

Conflict of Interest/Disclosure
Marianthi Markatou has no conflicts of interest and
Robert Ball has no conflicts of interest. They disclose
authorship of a patent application based on the work
described in ref. 46 (US Patent Application No. 13/715,186,
Washington, DC, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office).

REFERENCES
[1] D. C. Classen, L. S. Pestotnik, R. S. Evans, J. F. Lloyd,
and J. P. Buke, Adverse drug events in hospitalized
patients. Excess length of stay, extra costs, and attributable
mortality, JAMA 277 (1997), 301–306.
[2] D. J. Cullen, B. J. Sweitzer, D. W. Bates, E. Burdick, A.
Edmondson, and L. L. Leape, Preventable adverse drug
events in hospitalized patients: a comparative study of
intensive care and general care units, Crit Care Med 25
(1997), 1289–1297.
[3] D. J. Cullen, D. W. Bates, S. D. Small, J. B. Cooper, A. R.
Nemeskal, and L. L. Leape, The incident reporting system
does not detect adverse events: a problem for quality
improvement, Jt. Comm. J. Qual. Improv 21 (1995),
541–548.
[4] G. Peter and M. G. Myers, Intussusception, rotavirus and
oral vaccines: summary of a workshop, Pediatrics 110
(2002), e67.
[5] D. W. Bates, N. Spell, D. J. Cullen, E. Burdick, N. Laird,
L. A. Petersen, S. D. Small, B. J. Sweitzer, L. L. Leape,
The cost of adverse drug events in hospitalized patients.
Adverse Drug Events Prevention Study Group JAMA 277
(1997), 307–311.
[6] D. W. Bates, D. J. Cullen, N. Laird, L. A. Petersen,
S. D. Small, D. Servi, G. Laffel, B. J. Sweitzer, B. F. Shea,
R. Hallisey, M. Vander Vliet, R. Nemeskal, L. L. Leape,
D. Bates, P. Hojnowski-Diaz, S. Petrycki, M. Cotugno,
H. Patterson, M. Hickey, S. Kleefield, J. Cooper,
E. Kinneally, H. J. Demonaco, M. Dempsey Clapp,
T. Gallivan, J. Ives, K. Porter, B. T. Thompson,
J. R. Hackman, A. Edmondson, Incidence of adverse drug
events and potential adverse drug events. Implications for
prevention. Adverse Drug Events Study Group JAMA 274
(1995), 29–34.
[7] W. K. Amery, Why there is a need for pharmacovigilance,
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 8 (1999), 61–64.
[8] C. Chuang-Stein, N. R. Mohberg, and D. M. Musselman,
Organization and analysis of safety data using a multivariate
approach, Stat Med 11 (1992), 1075–1089.
[9] C. Chuang-Stein, Safety analysis in controlled clinical
trials, Drug Inf Assoc J (1998), 32 1363S–1372S.
[10] B. J. Crowe, H. A. Xia, J. A. Berlin, D. J. Watson, H. Shi,
S. L. Lin, J. Kuebler, R. C. Schriver, N. C. Santanello,
G. Rochester, J. B. Porter, M. Oster, D. V. Mehrotra, Z. Li,
E. C. King, E. S. Harpus, and D. B. Hall, Recommendations for safety planning, data collection, evaluation and
reporting during drug, biologic and vaccine development:
a report of the safety planning, evaluation, and reporting
team, Clin Trials 6 (2009) 430–440.
[11] M. A. Robb, J. A. Racoosin, R. E. Sherman, T. P.
Gross, R. Ball, M. E. Reichman, K. Midthun, J. Woodcock,
FDA’s sentinel initiative: expanding the horizons of medical

Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

366

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]
[26]
[27]

Statistical Analysis and Data Mining, Vol. 7 (2014)
product safety, Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 21(S1) (2012),
9–11.
M. B. Rennels, U. D. Parashar, R. C. Holman, C. T. Le,
H.-G. Chang, R. I. Glass, Lack of an apparent association
between intussusception and wild or vaccine rotavirus
infection, Pediatr Infect Dis J 17 (1998), 924–925.
T. V. Murphy, P. M. Gargiullo, M. S. Massoudi, D. B. Nelson, A. O. Jumaan, C. A. Okoro, L. R. Zanardi, S. Setia,
E. Fair, C. W. LeBaron, M. Wharton, J. R. Livengood,
(Rotavirus Intussusception Investigation Team), Intussusception among infants given an oral rotavirus vaccine, New
Engl J Med 344 (2001), 564–572.
D. J. Hand and R. J. Bolton, Pattern discovery and detection: a unified statistical methodology, J Appl Stat 31(8)
(2004), 885–924.
L. Huang, J. Zalkikar, and R. C. Tiwari, A likelihood ratio
test based method for signal detection with application to
FDA’s drug safety data, J Am Stat Assoc 106 (2011),
1230–1241.
W. DuMouchel, Bayesian data mining in large frequency
tables, with an application to the FDA spontaneous
reporting system (with discussion), Am Stat 53 (1999),
177–202.
H. Cao, G. B. Melton, M. Markatou, and G. Hripcsak, Use
abstracted patient-specific features to assist an informationtheoretic measurement to assess similarity between medical
cases, J Biomed Inf 41 (2008) 882–888.
M. Markatou, P. Kurrupumullage Don, J. Hu, F. Wang,
J. Sun, R. Sorrentino, S. Ebadollahi, Case-based reasoning
in comparative effectiveness research, IBM J Res Dev 56
(2012), 4:1–4:12.
Food and Drug Administration, Guidance to Industry:
Good Pharmacovigilance Practices and Pharmacoepidemiologic Assessment, 2005, http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/
index.html.
M. Hauben, D. Madigan, C. M. Gerrits, L. Walsh, E. P. van
Puijenbroek, The role of data mining in pharmacovigilance,
Expert Opin Drug Saf 4 (2005) 929–948
H. Cao, G. Hripcsak, and M. Markatou, A statistical
methodology for analyzing co-occurrence data from a large
sample, J Biomed Inf 40 (2007), 343–352.
S. W. J. Evans, P. C. Waller, and S. Davis, Use of proportional reporting ratios (PRRs) for signal generation from
spontaneous adverse drug reaction reports, Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 10 (2001), 483–486.
R. Orre, A. Bate, N. G. Noren, E. Swahn, S. Arnborg, and
R. I. Edwards, A Bayesian recurrent neural network for
unsupervised pattern recognition in large incomplete data
sets, Int J Neural Syst 15 (2005), 207–222.
A. J. Forster, A. Jennings, C. Chow, C. van Walraven, A
systematic review to evaluate the accuracy of electronic
adverse drug event detection, J Am Med Inform Assoc 19
(2012) 31–38.
M. Lindquist, The need for definitions in pharmacovigilance, Drug Saf 30 (2007), 825–830.
A. Bate, E. G. Brown, S. A. Goldman, and M. Hauben,
Terminological challenges in safety surveillance, Drug Saf
35 (2012), 79–84.
P. B. Ryan, D. Madigan, P. E. Stang, J. M. Overhage, J. A.
Racoosin, and A. G. Hartzema, Empirical assessment of
methods for risk identification in healthcare data: results
from the experiments of the observational medical outcomes
partnership, Stat Med (2012) 31 4401–4415.

Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

[28] C. Reich, P. B. Ryan, P. E. Stang, M. Rocca, Evaluation
of alternative standardized terminologies for medical conditions within a network of observational healthcare
databases, J Biomed Inf 45 (2012) 689–696.
[29] R. Harpaz, W. DuMouchel, N. H. Shah, D. Madigan, P.
Ryan, and C. Friedman, Novel data mining methodologies
for adverse drug event discovery and analysis, Clin
Pharmacol Ther 91(6) ( 2012), 1010–1021.
[30] R. Harpaz, W. DuMouchel, P. LePendu, A. Bauer-Mehren,
P. Ryan, and N. H. Shah, Performance of pharmacovigilance signal detection algorithms for the FDA adverse
event reporting system, Clin Pharmacol Ther 93(6) (2013)
539–546.
[31] O. Caster, G. N. Noren, D. Madigan, and A. Bate, A logistic regression in signal detection: another piece added to the
puzzle, Clin Pharmacol Ther 94(3) (2013), 312.
[32] J. Hopstadius, G. N. Noren, A. Bate, and J. R. Edwards,
Impact of stratification on adverse drug reaction surveillance, Drug Saf 31(11) (2008), 1035–1048.
[33] I. Ahmed, F. Thiessard, G. Miremont-Salame, B. Begaud,
and P. Tubert-Bitter, Pharmacovigilance data mining with
methods based on false discovery rates: a comparative
simulation study, Clin Pharmacol Ther 88 (2010), 492–498.
[34] H. Rolka, D. Bracy, C. Russell, D. Fram, and R. Ball,
Using simulations to assess the sensitivity and specificity of
a signal detection tool for multidimensional public health
surveillance data, Stat Med 24 (2005), 551–562.
[35] P. W. Ewan, Anaphylaxis, BMJ 316 (1998), 1442–1445.
[36] C. Ponvert, P. Scheinmann, Vaccine allergy and pseudoallergy, Eur J Dermatol 13 (2003) 10–15 .
[37] J. U. Ruggeberg, M. S. Gold, J.-M. Bayas, M. D. Blum,
J. Bonhoeffer, S. Friedlander, G. de Souza Brito, U.
Heininger, B. Imoukhuede, A. Khamesipour, M. ErlewynLajeunesse, S. Martin, M. Makela, P. Nell, V. Pool, N.
Simpson, Anaphylaxis: case definition and guidelines for
data collection, analysis and presentation of immunization
safety data, Vaccine 25 (2007), 5675–5684.
[38] S. I. Wasserman, Anaphylaxis, In Clinical Immunology.
Principles and Practice, vol. 46, R. R. Rich, T. A. Fleisher,
W. T. Shearer, and W. T. Kotzin, eds. Toronto, Mosby,
2001, 1–11.
[39] A. Madaan, D. E. Maddox, Vaccine allergy: diagnosis and
management, Immunol Allergy Clin North Am, 23 (2003),
555–588.
[40] FDA, Adverse Events Reporting System (AERS), http://
www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInfor
mation/Surveillance/AdverseDrugEffects/default.htm.
[41] FDA and CDC Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System
(VAERS), http://vaers.hhs.gov/data/index.
[42] Eudravigilance, EMA. http://eudravigilance.ema.europa.eu/
human/index.asp.
[43] Japanese and Medical Devices Agency Individual Case
Safety Report database, http://www.pmda.go.jp/english/
service/precautions.html
[44] The WHO Upsalla Monitoring Center database, VigiBase,
http://www.who-umc.org.
[45] International Conference on Harmonization of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for
Human Use, Maintenance of the ICH Guideline on Clinical
Safety Data Management: Data Elements for Transmission
of Individual Case Safety Reports E2b(R2), http://www.ich.
org/products/guidelines/efficacy/article/efficacy-guidelines.
html.

Markatou and Ball: A Pattern Discovery Framework for Spontaneous Reporting Systems
[46] T. Botsis, M. D. Nguyen, E. J. Woo, M. Markatou, and
R. Ball, Text mining for the vaccine adverse event reporting
system: medical text classification using informative feature
selection, J Am Med Inf Assoc 18 (2011), 631–638.
[47] T. Botsis, J. E. Woo, and R. Ball, Application of information retrieval approaches to case classification in the vaccine adverse event reporting system, Drug Saf 36 (2013)
573–582.
[48] R. Ball and T. Botsis, Can network analysis improve pattern
recognition among adverse events following immunization
reported to VAERS?, Clin Pharmacol Ther 90 (2011),
271–278.
[49] T. Botsis and R. Ball, Network analysis of possible anaphylaxis cases reported to the US Vaccine Adverse Event
Reporting System after H1N1 influenza vaccine, Stud
Health Technol Inf 169 (2011), 564–568.
[50] A. L. Barabasi and R. Albert, Emergence of scaling in
random networks, Science 286 (1999), 509–512.
[51] F. Papadopoulos, M. Kitsak, M. A. Serrano, M. Boguna,
and D. Krioukov, Popularity versus similarity in growing
networks, Nature 489 (2012), 537–540.
[52] CIOMS VIII, Practical Aspects of Signal Detection in
Pharmacovigilance, Geneva, CIOMS, 2010.
[53] M. Hauben and J. K. Aronson, Defining “signal” and its
subtypes in pharmacovigilance based on a systematic
review of previous definitions, Drug Saf 32 (2009), 99–110.
[54] J. Einmahl, J. Li, and R. Liu, Thresholding events of
extreme in simultaneous monitoring of multiple risks,
Journal of the American Statistical Association 104 (2009),
982–992.
[55] T. B. Agbabiaka, J. Savoric, and E. Ernst, Methods for
causality assessment of adverse drug reactions: a systematic
review, Drug Saf 31 (2008) 21–37.
[56] A. Tversky, Features of similarity, Psychol Rev 84 (1977),
327–352.
[57] D. W. Goodall, A new similarity index based on probability, Biometrics 22 882–907.
[58] J. C. Gower, A general coefficient of similarity and some
of its properties, Biometrics 27 (1971), 857–874.
[59] E. Levina and P. J. Bickel, The earth mover’s distance
is the Mallows distance. Some insights from statistics
In Proceedings of ICCV2001, Vancouver, Canada, 2001,
251–256.
[60] M.-F. Balcan, A. Blum, and N. Srebro, A theory of learning
with similarity functions, Mach Learn 72 (2008), 89–112.
[61] M.-F. Balcan, A. Blum, and N. Srebro, Improved guarantees for learning via similarity functions, In Proceedings of
the 21st Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT),
2008, 287–298.

367

[62] A. Panagiotelis, C. Czado, and H. Joe, Pair copula constructions for multivariate discrete data, J Am Stat Assoc
107 (2012), 1063–1072.
[63] D. G. Clayton, A model for association in bivariate life
tables and its application in epidemiological studies of
familial tendency in chronic disease incidence, Biometrika
65 (1978), 141–151.
[64] D. Oakes, Bivariate survival models induced by frailties, J
Am Stat Assoc 84 (1989), 487–493.
[65] D. M. Zimmer and P. K. Trivedi, Using trivariate copulas
to model sample selection and treatment effects: application
to family health care demand, J Bus Econ Stat 24 (2006),
63–76.
[66] P. Tubert, B. Begaud, J.-C. Pere, F. Haramburu, and J.
Lelouch, Power and weaknesses of spontaneous reporting:
a probabilistic approach, J Clin Epidemiol 45 (1992),
283–286.
[67] J. Scott, T. Botsis, R. Ball, Simulating adverse event spontaneous reporting systems as preferential attachment networks: application to the vaccine adverse event reporting
system, Appl Clin Inf 5(1) (2014), 206–218.
[68] I. Ahmed, C. Dalmasso, F. Haramburu, F. Thiessard, P.
Broet, and P. Tubert-Bitter, False discovery rate estimation
for frequentist pharmacovigilance signal detection methods,
Biometrics 66 (2010), 301–309.
[69] J. B. Copas and H. G. Li, Inference for non-random samples (with discussion), J R Stat Soc Ser B 59 (1997), 55–95.
[70] P. McCullagh, Sampling bias and logistic models (with
discussion), J R Stat Soc Ser B 70 (2008), 643–677.
[71] T. M. F. Smith, On the validity of inferences from nonrandom sample, J R Stat Soc Ser A 146 (1983), 394–403.
[72] J. J. Heckman, Sample selection bias as a specification
error, Econometrica 47 (1979), 153–161.
[73] C. F. Manski, Anatomy of the selection problem, J Hum
Resour 24 (1989), 343–360.
[74] B. L. De Stavola and D. R. Cox, On the consequences of
overstratification, Biometrika 95 (2008), 992–996.
[75] P. R. Rosenbaum and D. B. Rubin, The central role of the
propensity score in observational studies for causal effects,
Biometrika 70 (1983), 41–55.
[76] P. C. Austin, The performance of different propensity-score
methods for estimating differences in proportions (risk
differences or absolute risk reductions) in observational
studies, Stat Med 29 (2010) 2137–2148.
[77] D. Madigan, P. B. Ryan, M. Schuemie, P. E. Stang, M. J.
Overhage, A. G. Hartzema, M. A. Suchard, W. DuMouchel,
and J. A. Berlin, Evaluating the impact of database heterogeneity on observational study results, Am J Epidemiol 178
(2013), 645–651. DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwt010.

Statistical Analysis and Data Mining DOI:10.1002/sam

