Drug Saf (2016) 39:231–240
DOI 10.1007/s40264-015-0379-4

ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE

Social Media Mining for Toxicovigilance: Automatic Monitoring
of Prescription Medication Abuse from Twitter
Abeed Sarker1 • Karen O’Connor1 • Rachel Ginn1 • Matthew Scotch1,2
Karen Smith3 • Dan Malone4 • Graciela Gonzalez1

•

Published online: 9 January 2016
Ó The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract
Introduction Prescription medication overdose is the
fastest growing drug-related problem in the USA. The
growing nature of this problem necessitates the implementation of improved monitoring strategies for investigating the
prevalence and patterns of abuse of specific medications.
Objectives Our primary aims were to assess the possibility of utilizing social media as a resource for automatic
monitoring of prescription medication abuse and to devise
an automatic classification technique that can identify
potentially abuse-indicating user posts.
Methods We collected Twitter user posts (tweets) associated with three commonly abused medications (AdderallÒ,
oxycodone, and quetiapine). We manually annotated 6400
tweets mentioning these three medications and a control
medication (metformin) that is not the subject of abuse due to
its mechanism of action. We performed quantitative and
qualitative analyses of the annotated data to determine whether posts on Twitter contain signals of prescription medication abuse. Finally, we designed an automatic supervised
classification technique to distinguish posts containing signals
of medication abuse from those that do not and assessed the
utility of Twitter in investigating patterns of abuse over time.
& Abeed Sarker
abeed.sarker@asu.edu
1

Department of Biomedical Informatics, Arizona State
University, Scottsdale, AZ, USA

2

Center for Environmental Security, Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA

3

Rueckert-Hartman College for Health Professions, Regis
University, Denver, CO, USA

4

Department of Pharmacy Practice and Science, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA

Results Our analyses show that clear signals of medication abuse can be drawn from Twitter posts and the percentage of tweets containing abuse signals are significantly
higher for the three case medications (AdderallÒ: 23 %,
quetiapine: 5.0 %, oxycodone: 12 %) than the proportion
for the control medication (metformin: 0.3 %). Our automatic classification approach achieves 82 % accuracy
overall (medication abuse class recall: 0.51, precision:
0.41, F measure: 0.46). To illustrate the utility of automatic
classification, we show how the classification data can be
used to analyze abuse patterns over time.
Conclusion Our study indicates that social media can be a
crucial resource for obtaining abuse-related information for
medications, and that automatic approaches involving
supervised classification and natural language processing
hold promises for essential future monitoring and intervention tasks.

Key Points
Monitoring prescription medication abuse, which is a
rapidly growing medication-related problem in the
USA, is of paramount importance to public health.
Social media postings can be used to detect patterns
and intents of abuse and also to estimate the
prevalence of abuse for a drug.
Natural language processing and machine learning
can be applied to automatically detect posts
indicating prescription medication abuse, allowing
interested agencies to perform real-time monitoring
and analysis of medication abuse information.

232

1 Introduction
Prescription medication abuse and overdose have become
the fastest growing medication-related problems in the
USA, reaching epidemic proportions [1–3]. According to
the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) report [3]
there were 5.1 million drug-related (prescription and illicit)
emergency department visits in the year 2011, with
approximately half of these attributed to misuse or abuse.
The negative health consequences of prescription medication abuse are many, ranging from nausea to disorientation,
paranoia, seizures, and even death [2]. A recently published
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) report [4] shows that in
the year 2013 there were 43,982 deaths due to drug overdose, of which 22,767 were attributable to prescription
medications such as opioids and benzodiazepines (some
were due to co-ingestion [5]). The number of deaths due to
drug overdose has more than tripled in the USA since 1991
[6]. In the year 2007, opioid abuse alone amounted to an
estimated total cost of US$55.7 billion [7] and later estimates suggest that medication misuse costs up to
US$72.5 billion annually [8–10]. Despite such widespread
abuse of prescription medication, there is no current wellestablished source of data to monitor abusers’ attitudes,
methods, and patterns of abuse. Because of the severe
nature of this problem, the Office of National Drug Control
Policy released a drug abuse prevention plan [11], which
puts monitoring as one of the primary areas of focus.
Current prescription medication abuse monitoring
strategies are aimed primarily at distributors and licensed
practitioners. The Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA)
requires that wholesalers have monitoring programs in
place to identify suspicious orders. For licensed, prescribing health practitioners, most states have monitoring programs that are supported by the National Association of
State Controlled Substance Authorities and pharmacies are
required to report the patients, prescribers, and specific
medications dispensed for controlled substances. These
data are used by prescribers and law enforcement agencies
to identify and limit medication abuse. However, existing
control measures lack critical information such as the
patterns of usage of various medications and the demographic information of the users. For example, advertisements to deter prescription medication abuse might be
more successful if broadcast during high abuse periods, if
that information were available. Thus, there is a strong
motivation to discover newer monitoring sources and
methods.
We take the first steps towards operationalizing an
automated, social media-based, medication abuse monitoring system. Social media has evolved into a crucial
source of communication and it offers a range of

A. Sarker et al.

possibilities for establishing multi-directional interaction,
as well as acting as a resource for monitoring public sentiment and activity [12]. Twitter [13] is one of the most
popular resources, with 289 million monthly active users,
58 million tweets per day, and 2.3 billion search queries
per day [14]. Social media is currently being used as a
resource for various tasks ranging from customized
advertising [15] and sentiment analysis [16] to tasks
specific to the public health domain (e.g., monitoring
influenza epidemics [17], sexual health [18], pharmacovigilance [19], and drug abuse [3]). Our aims are to (1)
verify that Twitter posts contain identifiable information
about prescription medication abuse; (2) annotate abuseindicating posts and create an annotation guideline for
large-scale future research; and (3) verify the future
applicability of automatic systems for social media-based
medication abuse monitoring. We take a systematic
approach towards our end goal following on from our past
work on social media-based pharmacovigilance [20–22].

2 Methods
Figure 1 summarizes our methodological pipeline. The
figure is divided into four parts, each indicating the subsection in which the associated study component is discussed. From a high level, the whole process may be
grouped into four steps: (1) data collection; (2) annotation;
(3) classification; and (4) analysis. We outline each subprocess in the rest of this section.
2.1 Data Collection and Spelling Variant
Generation
We selected three abuse-prone medications (APMs) based
on their reported abuse potential. Two, AdderallÒ (amphetamine-mixed-salts) and oxycodone, are well-known,
while the third, quetiapine, is less widely known as an
abused medication but is gaining popularity [23]. Table 1
presents key information about these three medications.
We collected data associated with these medications by
querying the Twitter Streaming API, which provides realtime access to a subset of all tweets being posted. For
AdderallÒ, we used the trade name for querying. For
quetiapine and oxycodone, we used the generic names and
also their popular trade names OxyContinÒ and SeroquelÒ,
respectively. Since Twitter users frequently misspell
medication names, we applied a phonetic spelling generator to generate common misspellings [24]. We collected
data from March 2014 to June 2015 and included a control
medication for comparison, the oral diabetes drug metformin, as it does not have potential for abuse.

Social Media Mining for Toxicovigilance

233

Fig. 1 Pipeline for monitoring prescription medication abuse signals from Twitter. The four components of the pipeline are discussed in
Sects. 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4

Table 1 The three abuse-prone drugs included in the study, their types, and details of common abuse
Drug

Type

Abuse details

AdderallÒ
(amphetaminemixed-salts)

Schedule II controlled substance. A combination
psychostimulant drug used for the treatment of ADHD and
narcolepsy. Produces euphoria, alertness, and increased
concentration

AdderallÒ abuse includes intake for weight loss, increased
focus (e.g., for studying), athletic performance, and
recreational use

Oxycodone
(OxyContinÒ)

Schedule II controlled substance (opioid family). It is an
opioid agonist that produces analgesia through its effect on
the l-receptor and contributes to addiction through its effect
on dopamine receptors

In 2012, it is estimated that narcotic pain relievers were
abused by 2.1 million people in the USA [50]

Quetiapine
(SeroquelÒ)

An atypical antipsychotic generally used for the treatment of
schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. It may produce euphoria
in addition to its anxiolytic properties

Known to be less prone to abuse than some other drugs, but
has been named in the top 10 list of abused prescription
medications [23]

Note that tweets for AdderallÒ were collected using the trade name only, while both generic and trade names were used for oxycodone and
seroquel
ADHD attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder

2.2 Annotation
We randomly selected 2600 user posts mentioning
AdderallÒ,1 1600 each for oxycodone and quetiapine, and
600 mentioning metformin for annotation. Two annotators
performed binary classification of 6400 tweets to indicate
abuse or non-abuse. Both intent to abuse and actual abuse
were considered to be abuse for the purposes of annotation
and only personal experiences, rather than generic statements, were considered. Because of the short nature of the
posts on Twitter, it was often difficult to determine if a
tweet indicated abuse or prescription use. Tweets were
annotated as abuse-indicating if they did not mention
A larger number of AdderallÒ tweets were chosen for annotation
because of the significantly larger number of tweets available for it.

1

clinical diagnoses but did describe potential use for nonmedical benefits. Table 2 provides some examples of the
annotated tweets.
We used Cohen’s kappa [25] to measure the inter-annotator agreement, and obtained substantial agreement
(j = 0.78). Figure 2 illustrates the final distributions for
the proportions of abuse-indicating versus non-abuse
tweets for each of the four medications. AdderallÒ has a
much higher proportion of abuse-related Tweets than the
other medications. In contrast, the control medication,
metformin, had only two annotated abuse mentions. These
were judged to be noise during our review of the annotations, enabling us to estimate the amount of noise in nonabuse data. Annotator disagreements were resolved by the
study’s pharmacology expert (KS). Because of the

234

A. Sarker et al.

Table 2 Examples of abuse and non-abuse-indicating tweets from our dataset
Non-medical use/abuse-indicating tweets

Non-abuse tweets

about to be cracked on adderall to survive today

Seroquel is prescribed. i use valerian root sometimes too. mostly i don’t sleep

i’m just gonna shower and overdose on Seroquel so I’ll
sleep until morning

a prescription for adderall should come with my college acceptance paper
speaking of oxycodone .. i need to take mine. This pain is ridiculous

popped Adderall tonight hahahah let’s finish this 100 page
paper
an oxycodone high from snorting lasts for one hour, if it is
swallowed, your looking at three hour high

approach generates a set of features from the observation
and, using the model built on the training data, assigns a
category to the new observation. We describe our feature
sets in the following subsections.
2.3.1 Word n-Grams

Fig. 2 Distributions of abuse/non-abuse tweets for the four drugs.
The numbers and percentages of abuse-indicating tweets for each
drug are also shown

relatively complex decision making required to decide if a
tweet contains abuse information or not, and in the interest
of comparative research, our evolving annotation guideline
for this study is available to view [26].2
Following the annotation, in order to ascertain if the
proportions of abuse tweets for the APMs are different to
the proportion among the metformin tweets, we performed
Chi squared tests (H0: p1 = p2, i.e., the proportions of
abuse tweets are equal for each APM and metformin). In
all cases, the null hypothesis was rejected (p \ 0.05),
verifying that the APMs have significantly higher proportions of abuse-indicating tweets.
2.3 Supervised Classification
We model the task of detecting potentially abuse-indicating
tweets as a supervised classification problem and use a
number of features to address it. From the perspective of
machine learning, classification is the problem of assigning
a category, from a finite set of categories, to an observation. In our work, each tweet is an observation and there are
two possible categories. Since we have a set of annotated
tweets, we use them to train several machine learning
algorithms. In this manner, we provide supervision to our
algorithms. Given an unclassified observation, our

A word n-gram is a sequence of contiguous n words in a text
segment. Prior to generating the n-grams (1-, 2-, and
3-grams), we preprocessed the tweets to remove usernames
(e.g., @xxxx) and hyperlinks, stemmed (i.e., converted
words to their base forms: controlled, controlling ? control) the tweets using the Porter stemmer [27] and lowercased
them. We used a specialized tokenizer and part-of-speech
tagger [28] to break down posts into words and identify their
part-of-speech tags. We used the generated word tokens to
build the n-grams. Because of the short nature of the tweets,
the number of n-grams generated is relatively small. Hence,
we attempted to generate a set of additional features from the
texts, which encapsulate deeper semantic information.
2.3.2 Abuse-Indicating Terms
We collected terms from Hanson et al. [3, 29] that were
used to search for indications of alternative motive, coingestion, frequent doses, and alternative routes of admission. As they may indicate medication abuse, we generated
two features based on these terms—presence and counts of
occurrences.
2.3.3 Drug–Slang Lexicon
We collected a set of colloquial phrases and terms that are
used to discuss drug-related content on the internet [30].
We again used presence and counts as features, leaving out
terms that are five characters or less in length (to ignore
ambiguous terms: e.g., A, ace).
2.3.4 Synonym Expansion

2

The guideline also contains a set of ambiguous tweets identified by
our pharmacology expert, which require contextual analysis in the
future.

Our analysis of the tweets during annotation suggested that
users often express polarized sentiments when mentioning

Social Media Mining for Toxicovigilance
Table 3 Tenfold crossvalidation results showing
F scores for the two classes and
the overall accuracies

235

Classifier

Abuse F score

Non-abuse F score

Accuracy (%)

Naı̈ve Bayes

0.39

0.84

75

Weighted support vector machine (wSVM)

0.45

0.89

81

Maximum entropy

0.24

0.85

75

J48

0.22

0.92

85

Stacking

0.46

0.89

82

drug abuse. Therefore, we introduced a feature that has been
used in the past for sentiment analysis and polarity classification [31]. This feature is generated by identifying all
synonyms of all nouns, verbs and adjectives using WordNet
[32]. Synonym expansion enables the generation of a large
number of sentiment-indicating terms from a short post.
2.3.5 Word Clusters
Recent text classification tasks have benefited from the use
of word clusters, which are broad semantic groupings of
words learnt automatically from large amounts of unlabeled data, as features [33]. Therefore, we used the Twitter
word clusters provided by Nikfarjam et al. [22]. The
clusters were learnt from medication-related chatter collected for monitoring adverse drug reactions and each
cluster attempts to encapsulate terms that are generally
used in similar contexts. For each term, we used its cluster
number as a nominal feature.
2.3.6 Classification
We used four off-the-shelf supervised classification algorithms to assess the performance of automatic detection,
namely: Naı̈ve Bayes, Support Vector Machines (SVMs),
Maximum Entropy (ME), and a decision tree-based classifier (J48). We used the publicly available LibSVM [34]
and Weka [35] tools for these classifiers. Following the
initial classification, we focused on exploring optimization
techniques to improve the classification performance particularly for the positive (abuse) class, which is especially
difficult due to the class imbalance (i.e., the number of
negative examples is much greater than the number of
positive examples). To bias our classifiers towards choosing the positive class, we applied weights to give preference to this class [34]. Finally, all four classifiers were
combined via stacking [36], a technique where the predictions from the different classifiers are combined and
another algorithm is trained to make a final decision based
on the individual predictions.
Using the best classification system, we performed two
additional sets of experiments to (1) analyze the feature
contributions; and (2) estimate how more data will affect
performance. Results are presented in Sect. 3.

2.4 Analysis of Signals
To verify the utility of automatic classification and possible
future applications, we performed an analysis of abuse
patterns over time for AdderallÒ and oxycodone. We first
classified all of our collected tweets using the stackingbased classifier and then visualized the distributions of
tweets over time. Details of this analysis are presented in
Sect. 4.

3 Results
We collected 119,809 tweets for AdderallÒ, 4082 for
oxycodone, 4505 for quetiapine, and 1052 for metformin.
Our final annotated dataset contained 5799 annotated
tweets (excluding the 600 metformin tweets, and one
AdderallÒ tweet due to character encoding issues): 869
indicating abuse and 4930 with no indication of abuse.3
Table 3 presents the results of our automatic classification experiments using stratified tenfold cross-validations
over the whole data and Fig. 3 presents the equations used
to compute the scores.4 The table shows that weighted
SVMs have the highest F score for abuse among the
individual classifiers, but marginally better results are
observed when stacking is introduced.
In Table 4, we present the results of our two feature
analysis experiments. The single-feature scores indicate how
each feature performs individually, while the leave-outfeature scores indicate their contributions when combined
with other features by illustrating changes in performance
when they are removed from the combination. The most
useful feature set is n-grams, as depicted by the two sets of
results. Importantly, none of the single-feature scores are
able to achieve the performance of all of the features combined. Synonym expansion and the drug–slang lexicon perform poorly when applied as single features. Despite the
relative importance of word clusters in the single-feature
3

A sample of the finalized annotations will be made available to the
research community at http://diego.asu.edu/Publications/DrugAbuse_
DrugSafety.html.
4
Note that the overall accuracy is primarily driven by the classification performance on the larger class (i.e., non-abuse class) because
of the significantly larger number of instances.

236

A. Sarker et al.

Fig. 3 Equations for the classifier evaluation metrics. Accuracy is the
combined accuracy for the two classes, while the other three scores
are computed per class. a overall accuracy, f F score, fn number of

Table 4 Single-feature and
leave-out-feature experiments
showing the impact of each of
the five feature sets on
classification F scores (abuse
class)

false negatives, fp number of false positives, p precision, r recall, tn
number of true negatives, tp number of true positives

Feature

Single-feature F score

Leave-out-feature F score

N-grams

0.42

0.37

Abuse-indicating terms

0.30

0.41

Drug–slang lexicon

0.07

0.44

Syn-sets

0.09

0.44

Word clusters

0.35

0.43

Fig. 4 Classification performances for training data of different sizes

classifications, the performance of the classifier when this
feature is left out does not drop significantly.
Figure 4 illustrates how the classification performance
varies with the training set size. The key information
illustrated by the figure is that the abuse F score improves,
as training data are added, in an approximately logarithmic
fashion. Based on the logarithmic trend-line, one can predict that if 10,000? annotated training instances are used,
F scores of over 0.55 can be achieved for the abuse class
without the use of any additional features. The non-abuse
F scores and the accuracy scores are not significantly
affected by the size of the training set, which is unsurprising considering the data imbalance issue.

4 Discussion
Our goals in this study were to verify that social media
contains information indicating prescription medication
abuse, prepare an annotation guideline for the annotation of

Twitter data, and use a moderate sample of annotations to
investigate if automatic classification approaches can be
used to automatically detect information about prescription
medication abuse from Twitter. Our experiments strongly
suggest that social networks such as Twitter may provide
valuable information about medication abuse. While the
task of annotation of social network data is time-consuming and ambiguous, the availability of annotated data
allows the training of systems that can identify abuse-related information from large volumes of social media data.
Our trained system is capable of classifying abuse and nonabuse tweets with fair accuracy and its performance is
likely to improve significantly with the availability of larger amounts of annotated data.
In this section we first outline some related work in
order to put our contributions into context. We then verify
the utility of automatic classification approaches for medication abuse monitoring. Finally, we present a brief error
analysis to identify essential future improvements and
discuss some of the limitations of this study.
4.1 Related Work
Toxicovigilance involves the active detection, validation,
and follow-up of clinical adverse reactions related to toxic
exposures, which may be caused by the non-medical use of
prescription medications. Traditional tools for toxicovigilance include federally sponsored surveys and reports from
the National Poisoning Data System (NPDS) [37], the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [38], and hospital
networks such as DAWN. The NPDS provides data about
calls that are placed to poison centers nationwide and,
according to their website, the information may be used to

Social Media Mining for Toxicovigilance

track the risks of prescription medication abuse. The FDA
MedWatch program [39] provides information about
adverse drug events but does not monitor patterns of abuse
actively (although there is much discussion around opioids
and, in the last year, hydrocodone has moved to a schedule II drug). In contrast, DAWN primarily reports emergency department visit data. Although these systems all
provide valuable data, there is a gap in determining
prevalence (no denominator) and monitoring patterns of
and attitudes towards abuse, which is one contribution
social media can provide.
The first effort to propose the use of social media for
monitoring the prevalence of drug abuse was the Psychonaut project [40] and recent studies have verified that it
operates as a channel for exchanging prescription medication abuse information [41]. Chary et al. [6] discussed
the benefits of using social media for toxicovigilance, relative to traditional tools, and suggested the use of text
mining techniques, but did not report conducting any
evaluations using these techniques. Recent efforts have
attempted to develop web-based platforms and ontologies
for social media mining for toxicovigilance [42]. Also,
social media data have been used to perform targeted
toxicovigilance tasks such as analyzing the effects of drug
reformulation [43] or the phases of drug abuse recovery
[44] from specialized forums.
Some recent studies have focused specifically on utilizing data from Twitter. Cavazos-Rehg et al. [45]
demonstrated that social media can influence the behavior
of young people, necessitating the need for surveillance
efforts to monitor content on Twitter. Scott et al. [46] and
Hanson et al. [29] presented similar conclusions and suggested that Twitter serves as a potential resource for not
only surveillance but also for studying attitudes towards
prescription drug abuse. Hanson et al. [3] studied the use of
AdderallÒ, concluding that through the analysis of Twitter
posts it can be verified that the medication is frequently
abused as a study aid by college students. Similarly,
Shutler et al. [47] qualitatively studied opioid abuse using a
small set of annotated data. Very recently, Coloma et al.
[48] studied the potential of social media in drug safety
surveillance. The study concluded, following an elaborate
manual analysis, that further research is required for
establishing social media as a reliable resource. Importantly, this and other recent studies on this topic do not
utilize the most attractive property of social media—massive volumes of data and automatic processing.
4.2 Utility of Automatic Monitoring
We classified all AdderallÒ tweets collected from March
2014 to March 2015 and all oxycodone tweets from June
2014 to June 2015.5 Figure 5 presents the distribution of all

237

tweets and abuse-indicating tweets for the two medications,
and also the proportions of abuse-indicating tweets.
Monthly usage patterns are different for the two medications, the only similarity being peaks around the holiday
season (December). Furthermore, the distribution for
AdderallÒ agrees with the manual analysis in Hanson et al.
[3] and clearly illustrates the high number of tweets close
to traditional exam times (i.e., November/December and
April/May). Interestingly, Fig. 5b suggests that the general
trend for proportions is increasing for AdderallÒ and
decreasing for oxycodone, although further analysis is
essential before drawing such conclusions. Analysis over
longer periods of time may reveal other interesting insights.
These results verify that automatic social media-based
monitoring of prescription medication abuse can play a role
in identifying patterns of prescription medication usage.
First, the numbers and proportions of abuse-indicating
tweets over a period of time give us an indication of the
extent of abuse for a specific medication. In addition,
deeper analysis, manual or otherwise, of a set of classified
tweets may reveal potentially decisive information. Other
information, such as demographics of users, can also be
extracted via automatic techniques for deeper analysis.
4.3 Error Analysis
In Table 5, we show that there are a large number of false
positives for AdderallÒ, but the reverse is true for the other
medications. Our analysis identified some key reasons
behind these numbers. For AdderallÒ, a large number of
tweets are impersonal, without any direct association to the
user. Although these were annotated as non-abuse, due to
the n-gram patterns and the presence of keywords, the
classifiers are often unable to accurately identify them.
Tweets mentioning other medications face the same issue,
but to a lesser extent. For quetiapine and oxycodone, the
high numbers of false negatives are caused by the lack of
sufficient abuse-indicating tweets in our training sample.
This problem can easily be addressed by incorporating
more data. In many cases, the tweets contained too many
non-standard spellings, which resulted in misclassifications
(generally, these contributed to false negatives). Non-standard spellings also impact the generation of deep linguistic features (e.g., synonyms). We identified these three
reasons (impersonal tweets, small training set, and nonstandard spellings) to be the primary causes of misclassifications. In addition, we also observed during the analysis
that a significant number of correctly classified tweets
contained evidence of co-ingestion (e.g., with marijuana,
5

Slightly different periods are used for the two medications as the
collection of oxycodone tweets commenced a little later than the other
medications.

238

A. Sarker et al.

Fig. 5 a Distributions of all collected tweets and automatically detected abuse-indicating tweets for AdderallÒ and oxycodone and b the
proportions of abuse-indicating tweets over the same time periods

Table 5 False negative and positive tweets for abuse classification
with the best classification system (stacking based)
Drug

False positive

False negative

AdderallÒ

559

197

Quetiapine

28

63

Oxycodone

95

108

coffee, and/or prescription medications). With Twitter data
indicating that there are significant levels of co-ingestionrelated abuse of these medications, the effects of such

intake should perhaps be studied in greater detail. Table 6
presents some sample misclassified tweets and some correctly classified tweets indicating co-ingestion.
4.4 Limitations
As already mentioned, the biggest limitation of our study,
from the perspective of supervised learning, is the lack of
sufficient training data. This is particularly true for the
abuse class, which has less than 1000 instances. Ambiguity
in tweets and the lack of context hinders both annotation
and automatic classification. A number of tweets were

Table 6 Examples of tweets that are difficult to classify (false positives and false negatives) and examples of co-ingestion
False positives

False negatives

True positives (suggestions of co-ingestion)

they need to make armpit
tampons for adderall abusers

if she’s craving ecstasy, oxycodone to, and is
tuliao you’re her, she, and is pending mine
for one day. maybe

john picked us up from the airport with medicinal, blunts,
adderall and booze. he was actually sent from the heavens

why would you want to take
seroquel recreationally ***

i got some oxycodone who tryna buy it off
me? $6 a pill

these are actually (half) sober
tweets and i haven’t slept yet
thanks Adderall

took adderall thinking it’d make work go by
faster now i’m not tired #paper-view

adderall to stay focused, xanax to take the edge off, pot to
mellow me out, cocaine to wake me back up and
morphine..well because its awesome
time for my daily afternoon relaxation ritual of smoking
weed, taking 2 mgs of clonazepam, and 400 mg of
seroquel xr
hello i am looking to speedball some cocaine and adderall so
i can complete a large online project if u have any leads
hmu

Offensive terms have been censored

Social Media Mining for Toxicovigilance

regarded to be ambiguous during annotations and these
were resolved by our pharmacology expert. These ambiguities leave a gray zone in the binary classification process
and this limitation will persist until future annotation
guidelines are able to specify more fine-tuned annotation
rules.
Because we use social media to collect abuse-related
information, our study is limited to the population group
that is adept at using social media. All public health
monitoring studies that rely on social media data are faced
with this limitation. However, as the rapid growth of social
media continues and as current users grow older, the
impact of this limitation will inevitably decrease.

5 Conclusion and Future Directions
We investigated the potential of social media as a resource
for monitoring medication abuse patterns. We first verified
that social media contains identifiable abuse-indicating
information for three commonly abused medications and that
these are significantly more prominent than potential noise
associated with non-abuse medications. We prepared annotation guidelines and annotated a moderate-sized dataset.
Using supervised classification, we obtained classification
accuracies of 82 % (positive class F score: 0.46). We identified three key factors that are likely to improve classification performance: identification of personal versus
impersonal tweets, normalization of tweets (e.g., spelling
correction), and the utilization of more training data. To
show the utility of automatic approaches for toxicovigilance,
we performed an analysis of usage patterns and showed that
our conclusions agree with past manual analyses.
Based on the promising results obtained, we will focus
strongly on the following three research problems in the
future:
1.

2.

3.

Annotation. We will significantly increase the size of
our annotated dataset and perform iterative annotations
to reduce ambiguities.
Visualization and real-time monitoring. Figure 5 is an
example of how medication abuse information can be
visualized. We intend to implement web-based visualization tools for real-time monitoring of the social
media sphere.
Natural language processing-oriented improvements.
To improve the reliability of our methods, we will
explore natural language processing techniques to
automatically identify non-personal tweets. We will
also attempt to perform lexical normalization as a
preprocessing step to correct spelling errors. While
some work has been done on social media text
normalization [49], there are no available techniques

239

that are customized to specific types of social media
text (e.g., health-related social media text).
We believe that our automatic approaches will have
significant importance for various toxicovigilance tasks,
including, but not limited to, determining the prevalence of
abuse, studying medication abuse patterns, and identifying
the impacts of control measures.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank the anonymous
reviewers for their helpful feedback.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Funding This work was supported by National Institutes of Health
(NIH) National Library of Medicine (NLM) grant number
NIH NLM 5R01LM011176. The content is solely the responsibility
of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of
the NLM or NIH.
Conflict of interest Abeed Sarker, Rachel Ginn, Karen O’Connor,
Matthew Scotch, Karen Smith, Dan Malone, and Graciela Gonzalez
have no conflicts of interest that are directly relevant to the content of
this study.
Ethical approval
Informed consent

Not applicable.
Not applicable.

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons
license, and indicate if changes were made.

References
1. Young S. White House launches effort to combat soaring prescription drug abuse. CNN 2011. http://www.cnn.com/2011/
HEALTH/04/19/drug.abuse/. Accessed 15 Nov 2015.
2. The DAWN Report. Highlights of the 2011 Drug Abuse Warning
Network (DAWN) findings on drug-related emergency department
visits.
2013.
http://archive.samhsa.gov/data/2k13/
DAWN127/sr127-DAWN-highlights.htm. Accessed 15 Nov
2015.
3. Hanson CL, Cannon B, Burton S, Giraud-Carrier C. An exploration of social circles and prescription drug abuse through
twitter. J Med Internet Res. 2013;15(9):e189.
4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: National Vital
Statistics System. Mortality data. 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
deaths.htm. Accessed 15 Nov 2015.
5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prescription drug
overdose in the United States: fact sheet. 2015. http://www.cdc.
gov/drugoverdose/index.html. Accessed 15 Nov 2015.
6. Chary M, Genes N, McKenzie A, Manini AF. Leveraging social
networks for toxicovigilance. J Med Toxicol. 2013;9(2):184–91.
7. Birnbaum HG, White AG, Schiller M, Waldman T, Cleveland
JM, Roland CL. Societal costs of prescription opioid abuse,
dependence, and misuse in the United States. Pain Med.
2011;12(4):657–67.

240
8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prescription painkiller overdoses in the US. 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/
painkilleroverdoses/. Accessed 15 Nov 2015.
9. Jena AB, Goldman DP. Growing Internet use may help explain
the rise in prescription drug abuse in the United States. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2011;30(6):1192–9.
10. Wu LT, Pilowsky DJ, Patkar AA. Non-prescribed use of pain
relievers among adolescents in the United States. Drug Alcohol
Depend. 2008;94(1–3):1–11.
11. Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP). Responding to
America’s prescription drug abuse crisis. 2011. https://www.
whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/ondcp/issuescontent/
prescription-drugs/rx_abuse_plan.pdf. Accessed 15 Nov 2015.
12. Capurro D, Cole K, Echavarrı́a MI, Joe J, Neogi T, Turner AM. The
use of social networking sites for public health practice and
research: a systematic review. J Med Internet Res. 2014;16(3):e79.
13. Twitter. Company. https://about.twitter.com/company. Accessed
21 May 2015.
14. Statistic Brain Research Institute. Twitter statistics. http://www.
statisticbrain.com/twitter-statistics/. Accessed 19 Nov 15.
15. Kaplam AM, Haenlein M. Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of Social Media. Bus Horiz.
2010;53(1):59–68.
16. Pang B, Lee L. Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Found
TrendsÒ Inf Retr. 2008;2(1–2):1–135.
17. Ginsberg J, Mohebbi MH, Patel RS, Brammer L, Smolinski MS,
Brilliant L. Detecting influenza epidemics using search engine
query data. Nature. 2009;457(7232):1012–4.
18. Gold J, Pedrana AE, Sacks-Davis R, Hellard ME, Chang S,
Howard S, et al. A systematic examination of the use of online
social networking sites for sexual health promotion. BMC Public
Health. 2011;11:583.
19. Freifeld CC, Brownstein CC, Menone CM, Bao W, Felice R, KassHout T, et al. Digital drug safety surveillance: monitoring pharmaceutical products in Twitter. Drug Saf. 2014;37(5):343–50.
20. Sarker A, Gonzalez G. Portable automatic text classification for
adverse drug reaction detection via multi-corpus training.
J Biomed Inform. 2015;53:196–207.
21. Sarker A, Ginn R, Nikfarjam A, O’Connor K, Smith K, Jayaraman S, et al. Utilizing social media data for pharmacovigilance: a
review. J Biomed Inform. 2015;54:202–12.
22. Nikfarjam A, Sarker A, O’Connor A, Ginn R, Gonzalez G.
Pharmacovigilance from social media: mining adverse drug
reaction mentions using sequence labeling with word embedding
cluster features. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2015;22(3):671–81.
23. Sansone RA, Sansone LA. Is seroquel developing an illicit reputation for misuse/abuse? Psychiatry (Edgmont). 2010;7(1):13–6.
24. Pimpalkhute P, Patki A, Nikfarjam A, Gonzalez G. Phonetic
spelling filter for keyword selection in drug mention mining from
social media. AMIA Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc. 2014;2014:90–5.
25. Carletta J. Assessing agreement on classification tasks: the kappa
statistic. Comput Linguist. 1996;22(2):249–54.
26. O’Connor K, Ginn R, Smith K, Sarker A. Toxicovigilance from
social media: annotation guidelines. Arizona State University.
Version 1.1. July 2015. http://diego.asu.edu/guidelines/
DrugAbuseAnnotationGuideline1.1.pdf. Accessed 14 Dec 2015.
27. Porter MF. An algorithm for suffix stripping. Program.
1980;14(3):130–7.
28. Owoputi O, O’Connor B, Dyer C, Gimpel K, Schneider N, Smith
NA. Improved part-of-speech tagging for online conversational
text with word clusters. HLT-NAACL Proc. 2013;2013:380–90.
29. Hanson CL, Burton SH, Giraud-Carrier C, West JH, Barnes MD,
Hansen B. Tweaking and tweeting: exploring Twitter for nonmedical use of a psychostimulant drug (Adderall) among college
students. J Med Internet Res. 2013;15(4):e62.

A. Sarker et al.
30. NoSlang.com Drug Slang Translator. Drug slang dictionary.
http://www.noslang.com/drugs/dictionary.php. Accessed 7 May
2015.
31. Sarker A, Mollá D, Paris C. Automatic evidence quality prediction to support evidence-based decision making. Artif Intell Med.
2015;64(2):89–103.
32. Princeton University. WordNet: a lexical database for English.
https://wordnet.princeton.edu/. Accessed 19 Nov 15.
33. Turian J, Ratinov L, Bengio Y. Word representations: a simple
and general method for semi-supervised learning. ACL Proc.
2010;2010:384–94.
34. Chang CC, Lin CJ. LIBSVM: a library for support vector
machines. ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol. 2011;2(3):1–27.
35. Hall M, Frank E, Holmes G, Pfahringer B, Reutemann P, Witten
IH. The WEKA data mining software: an update. SIGKDD
Explor. 2009;11(1):10–8.
36. Wolpert DHDH. Wolpert. Stacked generalization. Neural Netw.
1992;5(2):241–59.
37. National Poisoning Data System. http://www.aapcc.org/datasystem/. Accessed 16 Dec 2015
38. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). http://www.fda.gov/.
Accessed 16 Dec 2015
39. US FDA. MedWatch: the FDA safety information and adverse
event reporting program. http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/.
Accessed 8 Aug 2015.
40. Schifano F, Deluca P, Baldachhino A, Peltoniemi T, Scherbaum
N, Torrens M, et al. Drugs on the web; the Psychonaut 2002 EU
project. Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry.
2006;30(4):640–6.
41. Mackey K, Liang BA, Strathdee SA. Digital social media, youth,
and nonmedical use of prescription drugs: the need for reform.
J Med Internet Res. 2013;15(7):e143.
42. Cameron D, Smith GA, Daniulaityte R, Sheth AP, Dave L, Chen
L, et al. PREDOSE: a semantic web platform for drug abuse
epidemiology using social media. J Biomed Inform.
2013;46(6):985–97.
43. McNaughton C, Coplan PM, Black RA, Weber SE, Chilcoat HD,
Butler SF. Monitoring of internet forums to evaluate reactions to
the introduction of reformulated oxycontin to deter abuse. J Med
Internet Res. 2014;16(5):e119.
44. MacLean D, Gupta S, Lembke A, Manning C, Heer J. Forum77:
an analysis of an online health forum dedicated to addiction
recovery. In: Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing.
New York: ACM; 2015. pp. 1511–1526.
45. Cavazos-Rehg P, Krauss M, Grucza R, Bierut L. Characterizing
the followers and tweets of a marijuana-focused Twitter handle.
J Med Internet Res. 2014;16(6):e157.
46. Scott KR, Nelson L, Meisel Z, Perrone J. Opportunities for
exploring and reducing prescription drug abuse through social
media. J Addict Dis. 2015;34(2–3):178–84.
47. Shutler L, Nelson LS, Portelli I, Blackford C, Perrone J. Drug use
in the Twittersphere: a qualitative contextual analysis of tweets
about prescription drugs. J Addict Dis. 2015;34(4):303–10.
48. Coloma PM, Becker B, Sturkeboom MC, van Mulligen EM, Kors
JA. Evaluating social media networks in medicines safety
surveillance: two case studies. Drug Saf. 2015;38(10):921–30.
49. Han B, Cook P, Baldwin T. Lexical normalization for social
media text. ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol. 2013;1(1):1–27.
50. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Results from the 2012 National Survey on Drug Use and Health:
summary of national findings. 2013.http://www.samhsa.gov/data/
sites/default/files/NSDUHresultsPDFWHTML2013/Web/NSDU
Hresults2013.pdf. Accessed 15 Nov 2015.

