NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
J Biomed Inform. 2014 December ; 52: 293–310. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2014.07.011.

Identifying plausible adverse drug reactions using knowledge
extracted from the literature
Ning Shanga,*, Hua Xua, Thomas C. Rindfleschb, and Trevor Cohena
aSchool

of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX,
United States

bNational

Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD, United States

Abstract
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Pharmacovigilance involves continually monitoring drug safety after drugs are put to market. To
aid this process; algorithms for the identification of strongly correlated drug/adverse drug reaction
(ADR) pairs from data sources such as adverse event reporting systems or Electronic Health
Records have been developed. These methods are generally statistical in nature, and do not draw
upon the large volumes of knowledge embedded in the biomedical literature. In this paper, we
investigate the ability of scalable Literature Based Discovery (LBD) methods to identify side
effects of pharmaceutical agents. The advantage of LBD methods is that they can provide
evidence from the literature to support the plausibility of a drug/ ADR association, thereby
assisting human review to validate the signal, which is an essential component of
pharmacovigilance. To do so, we draw upon vast repositories of knowledge that has been
extracted from the biomedical literature by two Natural Language Processing tools, MetaMap and
SemRep. We evaluate two LBD methods that scale comfortably to the volume of knowledge
available in these repositories. Specifically, we evaluate Reflective Random Indexing (RRI), a
model based on concept-level co-occurrence, and Predication-based Semantic Indexing (PSI), a
model that encodes the nature of the relationship between concepts to support reasoning
analogically about drug-effect relationships. An evaluation set was constructed from the Side
Effect Resource 2 (SIDER2), which contains known drug/ADR relations, and models were
evaluated for their ability to “rediscover” these relations. In this paper, we demonstrate that both
RRI and PSI can recover known drug-adverse event associations. However, PSI performed better
overall, and has the additional advantage of being able to recover the literature underlying the
reasoning pathways it used to make its predictions.

Keywords
Pharmacovigilance; Distributional semantics; Literature-based discovery; Predication-based
semantic indexing; Reflective random indexing

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
*
Corresponding author: sunnyshang001@gmail.com (N. Shang).

Shang et al.

Page 2

1. Introduction
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

An adverse drug reaction (ADR) is an “appreciably harmful or unpleasant reaction, resulting
from an intervention related to the use of a medical product” [1]. ADRs were reported to be
between the fourth and sixth leading cause of death in the United States in 1994 [2],
accounting for 3–7% of medical hospital admissions [3,4] and a substantial number of health
care visits [5]. They have a considerable negative impact on health and the healthcare
system, despite the fact that extensive pre-marketing clinical trials are designed to test drug
safety and efficacy. For example Phase III clinical trials have been estimated to cost 86.3
million U.S. dollars and last 30.5 months on average [6]. Nonetheless, rare ADRs may not
be detected due to the limited duration and sample size of such trials, and others may occur
on account of idiosyncratic characteristics of individuals excluded from the evaluated
sample. The continued monitoring for ADRs after drugs are released into the market, called
pharmacovigilance (PV), is therefore an important tool to monitor and improve drug safety.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Over the last decade, drug safety data obtained from spontaneous reporting systems (SRSs)
have been analyzed using quantitative data mining procedures to retrieve strongly associated
drug/ ADR pairs [7–9]. These highlighted associations are subsequently reviewed and
scrutinized by domain experts. Unfortunately, research suggests data collected by SRS are
limited by long time latency, incorrect or incomplete clinical information, underreporting
and reporting bias [10,11]. Consequently, clinicians and researchers have also utilized
existing healthcare data sources such as Electronic Health Records (EHRs) to attempt to
identify previously unreported ADRs [12–15]. However, these data are inherently noisy as
drugs and potential side effects may co-occur in the EHR for many reasons. In addition, the
EHR often contains free-text data, and the accuracy of Natural Language Processing (NLP)
tools is not perfect. New methods are required to selectively identify potentially hazardous
drug/ADR associations. Consequently, the development of computational approaches to
more accurately detect potential side effects is currently an active area of research [16–20].
These approaches have predominantly focused on improving signal detection using
statistical methods, machine learning (ML) or some combination thereof.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this paper, we develop an approach that is conceptually different than, and
complementary to, such efforts. Methods of literature- based discovery (LBD) are used to
detect potential drug/ ADR associations and to retrieve literature that supports their
plausibility. The paper proceeds as follows. First we discuss the significance and challenges
of pharmacovigilance, and how LBD methods might address these. We then provide
relevant background on recent developments in LBD; and introduce the NLP tools that were
used to extract knowledge from the literature for our experiments. We then discuss these
experiments, in which we attempt to identify known ADRs using knowledge from the
biomedical literature, and discuss their implications for pharmacovigilance practice.

2. Background
2.1. Pharmacovigilance: post-marketing drug surveillance
Vioxx (Rofecoxib) was withdrawn voluntarily from market by Merck in 2004, after it was
found that the use of this agent increased the risk of myocardial infarction [21]. Avandia

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(Rosiglitazone) was suspended from the European market in 2010 [22–24] on account of an
increased risk of cardiovascular complications. These high-profile examples illustrate that
PV is an important supplement to existing drug safety profiles because clinical drug trials
cannot be large or long enough to identify all problems related to a new drug [7].
Additionally, subjects are pre-selected by eligibility criteria and therefore may not fully
represent the patient population after the drugs are put to market [25]. Consequently, it is
highly unlikely that instances of all possible ADRs will be detected during pre-marketing
clinical trials.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The fact that more than 75 drug products were removed from the market due to safety
problems between 1964 and 2002 further emphasizes the importance of post-marketing drug
monitoring, known as PV – “the science and activities relating to the detection, assessment,
understanding and prevention of adverse effects or any other drug-related problem after
drugs are on market” [26]. PV is designed to detect any rare or long-term adverse effects
over a very large population and a long period of time. To advance this aim, health
departments and organizations (such as the World Health Organization (WHO), U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA), and European Medicines Agency (EMA)) encourage
physicians, other health care professionals, and patients to report voluntarily about any
observed ADRs. In addition to voluntarily reporting, pharmaceutical companies are required
to report serious adverse events [27]. These bodies have Spontaneous Reporting Systems
(SRSs) to enable the efficient submission of reports electronically [28,29].
In general, the PV process proceeds as follows [30,31]:
1.

Reported drug-related problems are collected in SRSs nationally or internationally.

2.

Quantitative data mining procedures are used to analyze these data and retrieve
relatively strongly correlated drug/ ADR pairs (drug/ADR associations).

3.

These highlighted associations are then reviewed and evaluated by domain experts
making up an expert clinical review panel.

4.

Associations considered to be of clinical interest are then annotated as signals.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Specifically, signal is defined as “reported information on a possible causal relationship
between an adverse event and a drug, the relationship being unknown or incompletely
documented previously” [32]. Overall, the PV process includes two components – a
statistical component (quantitative signal detection, steps (1) and (2)) and a qualitative
component (expert clinical review, steps (3) and (4)) [31].
Through PV, international and national health institutions gather large amounts of data from
SRS for further analysis. In addition, researchers have leveraged the opportunity provided
by broader availability of EHRs by utilizing EHR data for signal detection [12,33]. These
authors argue that EHR data can compensate for some of the deficiencies of SRS, such as
under-reporting, misclassification, a long lag time between observation and reporting,
reporting bias and the provision of incomplete clinical information [7,8]. Regardless of
source, statistical algorithms are applied to both SRS [34–39] and EHRs [12] to measure the
strength of observed drugevent associations.

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

It has been argued, though, that causality assessment is lacking in pharmacovigilance
practice [25]. While expert clinical review is designed to verify potential ADRs, it is a
human-intensive and time-consuming process. The available human resources are
inadequate to review the large amount of noisy signal detected in SRS and EHR data,
creating a bottleneck in the PV process. More research is needed to develop methods to
automate, or assist with, the knowledge-intensive task of expert clinical review.
2.2. Assessment of causality

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To address the issue of causality assessment, general principles exist that can be applied to
evaluate the causality of potential ADRs [40]. The theoretical basis for these principles was
proposed by Sir Austin Bradford-Hill in 1965 [41]. Bradford-Hill, an English epidemiologist
and statistician, was the first to demonstrate that cigarette smoking contributes toward lung
cancer using what are now referred to as the “Bradford-Hill criteria” [42]. The BradfordHill criteria provide viewpoints from which to evaluate evidence indicative of causality.
These criteria are named ‘strength’, ‘consistency’, ‘specificity’, ‘temporality’, ‘biological
gradient’ (referring to dose–response relationships), ‘plausibility’, ‘coherence’,
‘experimental evidence’, and ‘analogy’ [41,43,44]. Since then, the criteria have been widely
used in epidemiology and may be applied to assess the causality of drug/ADR relationships
[25,40,45]. Three of these criteria seem particularly pertinent to the development of
pharmacovigilance methods:
•

The strength criterion reflects that strong associations are more likely to be causal
than weak associations [40]. Quantitative statistical data mining methods evaluate
adverse drug reaction signal from the strength of association point of view.

•

The plausibility criterion relates to evidence about mechanisms that may be
involved to support a causal relationship.

•

The coherence criterion relates to the consistency of the hypothesis in question
with contemporary medical knowledge.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Review by domain experts is required to evaluate a signal from the above points of view
using their knowledge and judgment to find a signal with clinical significance. However, on
account of the human-intensive nature of this task, automated assistance is desirable. In this
study, we attempt to partially automate this aspect of the signal evaluation process. We do so
using methods that leverage knowledge extracted from the biomedical literature as a means
to assess the plausibility of an observed association. As one of these methods involves
automated analogical reasoning, it is interesting to note that Bradford-Hill also permitted
reasoning by analogy as an indicator of causality.
2.3. Literature-based discovery
Processing published biomedical literature to uncover implicit relationships among entities
is referred to as literature-based discovery (LBD) [46–49]. LBD involves finding new
knowledge by analyzing the literature, rather than through scientific experimentation. This is
accomplished by identifying hidden connections between entities described in the published
literature [46,50]. The origins of LBD may be traced to the serendipitous discovery that fish
oils can be therapeutically useful in the treatment of Raynaud’s syndrome (poor circulation

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 5

in the peripheries) by information scientist Don Swanson [46,50]. Weeber describes two
types of LBD [48].

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

One type, referred to as “open LBD”, starts from a known term or concept (generally called
A, although also referred to as C in Swanson’s early work) and tries to find an interesting
hypothesis in the form of a previously unrecognized connection to some other term. If an
article argues that A is associated with B and a second article mentions that B is associated
with C; A may treat C. For example dietary fish oil (A) affects platelet aggregation, blood
viscosity and vascular reactivity (B), and these biological factors (B) play a role in
Raynaud’s syndrome (C) [50]. Consequently, it is reasonable to hypothesize that A treats C.
The open LBD process proceeds from the source term A to an unknown target term C and
culminates in the generation of a new hypothesis.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The second type of LBD is referred to as “closed LBD”. In a closed LBD process the goal is
to evaluate an existing hypothesis. Closed LBD starts with known terms A and C, with the
goal to identify intermediate terms B that provide the bridge between A and C [48]. For
example, in 1988 Swanson found intermediate concepts to explain a hypothetical
relationship between migraine and magnesium [51]. Smalheiser and Swanson used closed
LBD to propose an explanation for epidemiologic evidence that estrogen might protect
against Alzheimer’s disease [52].
LBD methodologies generally utilize statistical information derived from the frequency with
which terms, or discrete concepts extracted from the literature using automated tools (e.g.
MetaMap) or assigned to it by human annotators [53], co-occur [54,55]. This has been
referred to as the co-occurrence model [56]. These cooccurrence statistics are interpreted by
correlation mining and ranking algorithms [55,57].

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A limitation of these methods is that they generally do not consider the nature of the
relationship between the terms or concepts concerned. To address this limitation, Hristovski
et al. [54] propose using semantic relations to eliminate spurious relationships introduced by
frequently co-occurring concepts that are not meaningfully related. In their initial work, the
semantic relations concerned were extracted from the literature by two Natural Language
Processing (NLP) systems: SemRep [58] and (specifically to extract phenotypic
information) BioMedLEE [59]. Their approach involved the specification of “discovery
patterns”, patterns of relationships between concepts that may indicate an implicit
therapeutic relationship [60]. These conditions can be specified as sets of semantic
predicates. For example, Ahlers et al. [61] defined the May_Disrupt pattern as follows:
Substance X 〈inhibits〉 Substance Y
Substance Y 〈causes|predisposes|associated with〉 Pathology Z
Substance X 〈may disrupt〉 Pathology Z
Variants of this approach have been applied to generate or support the hypotheses that fish
oil treats Raynaud’s disease [54], insulin treats Huntington disease [54], and antipsychotic
agents prevent cancer [61]. Recently, this approach was also adapted to provide evidence to
support the plausibility of an observed drug/ ADR association [62,63], providing proof-of-

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

concept that LBD methods can be applied within the problem domain of pharmacovigilance. Regardless of the application domain, knowledge used to populate discovery
patterns is extracted from the biomedical literature using NLP.
2.4. MetaMap and SemRep

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MetaMap is a widely-used NLP tool that identifies concepts from the Unified Medical
Language System (UMLS) in biomedical text [64,65]. SemRep [58,66] is a rule-based
Natural Language Processing tool [67] that draws on concepts extracted by MetaMap and
medical domain knowledge in the UMLS to extract semantic predications [58]. Its input
consists of sentences from the literature; its output is a series of semantic predications
identified in the respective text. A semantic predication is a subject-predicate-object triple in
which the subject and object are UMLS concepts and the predicate is a semantic
relationship. For example, metformin (UMLS Concept C0025598) TREATS diabetes
mellitus (C0011849) is a semantic predication extracted from the phrase “Treatment of
diabetes mellitus with metformin”. Evaluations of SemRep reveal a precision between 0.73
and 0.81, and a recall of 0.55 on the biomedical literature [67–69]. Semantic predications
benefit the LBD process in several respects. The additional information provided by
semantic predications makes the LBD results easier to interpret. In addition, it has been
noted that a large number of uninformative co-occurrences must be manually reviewed
when LBD is based on lexical statistics alone [70]. In contrast, semantic predications
provide the means to isolate relationships between concepts that are logically connected in a
meaningful way.
2.5. Semantic vectors for scalability

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Regardless of whether co-occurrence relations or discovery patterns are used, LBD systems
must explore large numbers of possible reasoning pathways to identify explanatory
hypotheses (for closed discovery) or previously unrecognized relationships (for open
discovery). Consequently, the process of LBD can be computationally expensive, and thus
faces scalability issues in the context of the rapid growth of the biomedical literature. In
contrast, the field of distributional semantics has produced corpus-derived statistical models
that can measure the relatedness between two concepts by comparing vector representations
of these concepts, called semantic vectors, that are derived from the contexts they have
occurred in [71], without the need to explicitly explore cooccurring concepts once the initial
model has been generated. Consequently, several authors have explored the use of
distributional models for LBD [72–74]. These geometrically motivated models of
distributional semantics represent terms or concepts as high-dimensional vectors derived
from the contexts in which they have occurred. Relatedness between a pair of terms or
concepts is then estimated from the similarity between the vectors [74].
Random indexing (RI), a relatively recent development, further improves the scalability of
distributional methods by avoiding computationally intensive approaches to dimensional
reduction of the original term-by-context matrix [75,76]. The algorithm’s computational
complexity scales linearly with increasing size of the input data. It can be incrementally
updated as new documents are added without retraining the whole dataset; thus it is
applicable to large corpora such as MEDLINE.

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In the experiments that follow, we evaluate the extent to which two variants of RI that have
been applied to LBD in our previous work can identify known side effects of pharmaceutical
agents. To implement a co-occurrence based approach, we use Reflective Random Indexing
(RRI) [74]. To implement a discovery pattern based approach, we use Predication-based
Semantic Indexing (PSI) [77]. On account of their scalability, these models permit inference
on a scale that would be prohibitively time-consuming if explicit exploration of all possible
reasoning pathways were attempted. This is accomplished through a mechanism known as
“indirect inference” [78], which enables distributional models to find meaningful
connections between terms that do not co-occur with one another directly, without the need
to explore intervening terms explicitly.

3. Materials and methods
3.1. Materials

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this study, MetaMapped Medline Baseline (MMB) and Semantic MEDLINE Database
(SemMedDB) were used to represent knowledge from the biomedical literature. Side Effect
Resource 2 (SIDER2) was used as data set for drug/ADR associations. The Semantic
Vectors package was used to build concept-based (RRI) and predication-based (PSI)
semantic space models [74,77].
3.1.1. MMB and SemMedDB—We used the 2012 MMB as a repository for conceptbased modeling. The MMB contains 20,494,848 articles included in Medline up to
November, 2011 and contains 399,701 distinct concepts. We used the SemMedDB V2.2
(semmedVER22) for this experiment, which was processed by SemRep version 1.5. This
was the current version when our experiments started. SemMedDB contains 22,252,812
citations included in Medline up to March 31, 2013 and contains 63,795,467 predications.
There are 58 distinct predicates and 257,350 distinct concepts in SemMedDB. There are also
negated predications in the SemMedDB repository (e.g. anticoagulant_therapy
NEG_TREATS (does not TREAT) phlebitis). However, the number of negative predications
is relatively small (1.2% of total predications), so we did not include these predications in
the PSI model.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

3.1.2. SIDER2—SIDER2 is a publicly available database containing information on
marketed medicines and their known adverse reactions [79]. SIDER2 was used to construct
a dataset for our experiment and as a reference standard to confirm whether a predicted side
effect is a true adverse reaction. We normalized SIDER2 terms by mapping drug and side
effects terms to UMLS CUI with UMLS Terminology Services (UTS) API 2.0 [80] and then
subsequently searching these UMLS CUIs in SemMedDB and MMB to retrieve the mapped
UMLS concepts which are represented in SemMedDB and MMB.
SIDER2 contains 996 drugs, 4192 side effects, and 99,423 drug/ ADR pairs. Only those side
effects and drugs that were represented in both the RRI and the PSI spaces were retained, so
our reference set contains 959 drugs, 3436 side effects, and 90,787 drug/ADR pairs. Each
vector model’s search space was composed of vectors representing the SIDER2 side effects.
For the PSI model, SIDER2 drug/ADR pairs were also used as training data to infer
predicate reasoning pathways.
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

3.1.3. MEDication–Indication (MEDI)—As we would anticipate connections in the
literature between medications and diseases they treat, we evaluated the utility of another
knowledge resource, MEDI [81], as a means to eliminate drug indications from
consideration as potential side effects. MEDI is a medication indication resource that was
extracted from a set of commonly used medication resources, including RxNorm,
MedlinePlus, SIDER2, and Wikipedia [81]. MEDI drugs are represented by RxNorm codes,
and indications are represented by ICD-9 codes. MEDI contains 3112 medications and
63,343 medication–indication pairs. Additionally, the MEDI high-precision subset (MEDIHPS) was created by only including indications that are retrieved from RxNorm or at least
two of the three other resources. MEDIHPS contains 2136 medications and 13,304
medication–indication pairs. The estimated precision of MEDI-HPS is about 92% [81].

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In our experiments, MEDI was used to eliminate drugs’ indications from the side effects
search space. To do so, we first needed to normalize all terms representing drugs (RxCUI)
and indications (ICD-9 codes) in MEDI to UMLS concepts, and then filtered each drug’s
indications from this drug’s search space. In many cases, there exist hierarchical
relationships between concepts. For example, C0264702 Acute myocardial infarction of
apical–lateral wall is a child node of C0155626 Acute myocardial infarction. So in our
experiment, we extended the MEDI list by aggregating the related concepts by different
hierarchical relations. We tested these various extensions of the MEDI list as different
MEDI interventions.
3.2. Methods
3.2.1. RRI—Reflective Random Indexing (RRI) [74] is a variant of RI adapted to enable
the recognition of meaningful indirect associations. The variant of RRI we used for our
experiments allows for the estimation of semantic relatedness between UMLS concepts, and
proceeds as follows.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

First, all terms in the text corpus are assigned unique vector representations, known as
elemental vectors. We will refer to the elemental vector for concept C as E(C) for remainder
of this manuscript. In accordance with the RI paradigm [82], elemental vectors are generated
stochastically. In this way, RI creates unique fingerprints for all terms in the text corpus. The
vector components can be binary, ternary, real, or complex values [82,83]. In our
experiments, we use 32,000 dimensional binary vectors constructed in accordance with the
Binary Spatter Code (BSC) [84], one of a family of representational approaches known as
Vector Symbolic Architectures (VSAs) [84–87]. This dimensionality was selected based on
the results of simulation experiments in previous research [88], which suggest that at this
dimensionality around 2000 unique elemental vectors can be superposed with low
probability of the superposed product being closer to some other elemental vector in the
space than its component vectors. However, we did not attempt to optimize this parameter,
and would anticipate some improvement in accuracy in exchange for the additional
computational work required to perform these experiments at higher dimensionalities. In the
BSC, elemental vectors are constructed by distributing an equal number of 1’s and 0’s at
random across the dimensions of the vector concerned. Consequently, elemental vectors
have a high probability of being orthogonal or close-to-orthogonal to each other, with

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 9

orthogonality defined as a Hamming Distance (HD) of half the dimensionality of the vectors
concerned [75,84,86].

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The next step is to generate vector representations of documents, by superposing the
elemental vectors of the terms contained in these documents. With binary vectors,
superposition is accomplished by keeping track of the number of 1’s and 0’s that have been
added in each dimension, and assigning the value in this dimension using the majority rule,
with ties split at random. We will refer to this operation by using the “+” symbol, with “+
=“ indicating a superposition that includes the vector on the left of the operator also (so
DOC(D)+=E(C) is equivalent to DOC(D) = DOC(D)+E(C)), a common operation during
training). In our experiments, this superposition is weighted using the Log-Entropy
weighting procedure. The local term weight for term i in document j (lij) is derived from the
frequency of a term in a document. The global weight for term i (gi) describes the frequency
of the term within the entire text corpus. They are computed with Eq. (1):

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(1)

This weighting scheme reduces the influence of high frequency terms that may be
uninformative, and tempers the influence of terms that recur frequently within a single
document [89]. Once document vectors have been generated (Eq. (2)), it is possible to
generate vector representations of concepts (in our case, or terms in the general case),
known as semantic vectors. We will refer to the semantic vector for concept C as S(C).
Semantic vectors are constructed by superposing vector representations of the documents a
concept occurs in.

(2)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Superposition of binary vectors requires maintaining a “voting record” that keeps track of
the number of 1’s and 0’s added in each dimension. When local and global weighting
metrics are utilized, the “votes” may not be integer values. So, for example, if the vector
1010 were added with a weight of 0.5, a straightforward implementation of the voting record
would add 0.5 to the dimensions of the voting record corresponding to the 1’s, and subtract
0.5 from the dimensions corresponding to the 0’s. Normalization involves tallying these
votes. After training is complete, those dimensions of the voting record with positive values
would be assigned 1, those with negative values would be assigned 0, and those with a zero
value would be assigned either 1 or 0 at random. In practice, however, it is computationally
inconvenient to maintain and update 32,000 real values to serve as a voting record for each
semantic vector. Consequently, the Semantic Vectors package employs a binary matrix

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 10

approximation of the voting record, which sacrifices some floating-point precision in
exchange for computational efficiency. These implementation details are provided in [83].

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

These operations are expressed concisely in the pseudo code in Fig. 1, adapted from [74]. A
schematic representation for RRI is shown in Fig. 2. We used Semantic Vectors Version 3.7
to build RRI vectors. Once semantic vectors were constructed, the relatedness between
drugs and ADRs was estimated as
of ADRs for each drug was provided.

. Therefore, a ranked list

3.2.2. PSI
3.2.2.1. Operations in PSI: The PSI model provides the means to implement discovery
patterns for LBD using distributional semantics [77,90]. This is accomplished by
representing concepts and relationships extracted by SemRep as high-dimensional vectors
using an adaption of RI. In previous work, PSI has been applied to discover therapeutic
relationships [77] using a two-stage process of discovery by analogy: first a geometric
operator is used to infer discovery patterns from known treatments, then the identified
discovery patterns are used to infer previously unseen therapeutic relationships.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to the superposition operation described previously, the PSI model utilizes a
binding operation. Binding (⊗) is a compositional operation that is provided by VSAs, such
as the BSC [86,87]. Binding two elemental vectors generates a third vector, which is
dissimilar from these two component vectors. The binding operation is reversible (release
ø). With binary vectors, pairwise exclusive OR (XOR) is used to accomplish both binding
(⊗) and release (ø).
3.2.2.2. PSI training process: The training process for generating semantic vectors
proceeds as follows:

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1.

Generate elemental vectors for all concepts and relations occurring in semantic
predications.

2.

Generate a semantic vector for each concept, initially empty.

3.

For each predication (concept–predicate–concept), bind the elemental vector of one
concept and the elemental vector of the predicate, and add this bound product to the
semantic vector for the other concept.

During step (3), a statistical weighting scheme is applied. For the predication C1 P C2, the
semantic vector S(C2) is generated as shown in Eq. (3).

(3)

The global weight Pf is derived from the number of times that the predication occurs in the
SemMedDB. The local weight idf (inverse document frequency of the concept c or the
predicate p) reflects the occurrence of the concept across all documents. They are computed
as shown in Eq. (4).

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 11

(4)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The pseudo code for PSI is displayed in Fig. 3.
All concepts and relations were assigned a binary elemental vector of 32,000 bits in length.
The semantic vector of each concept was generated by superposing bound products related
to this concept, where the bound products were produced by binding the elemental vectors
for the other concept and predicate elemental vectors in each predication this concept occurs
in. The search space of SIDER2 side effects contains 3436 ADRs.
3.2.2.3. Inferring discovery patterns: After training the semantic vectors, the PSI model
can be used to infer discovery patterns by “releasing” the semantic vector of a drug using the
semantic vector of its ADR.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The bound product of the drug’s semantic vector and discovery patterns’ vectors can be
subsequently used as a query vector to search the vector space of side effects. In our
procedure, discovery patterns were inferred from all known drug/ADR associations. For
each drug, the five discovery patterns that were most frequently inferred from all other drugs
and their ADRs were retained.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The pathways connecting drugs to side effects may not be restricted to one middle term (and
two predicates). In previous experiments predicting therapeutic relationships, performance
was improved by including pathways of three predicates and two middle terms [90]. This is
accomplished by generating a second-degree semantic vector for a concept, S2(concept), by
adding together the (first-degree) semantic vectors of all concepts connected to it by a
predicate of interest. In our experiments, the two most popular predicates from inferred
double-predicate reasoning pathways – INTERACTS_WITH and COMPARED_WITH –
were used to build second-degree semantic vectors S2. This vector is then used as an
alternative starting point for the inference procedure. From this point, the five most
frequently inferred double-predicate reasoning pathways using the second order semantic
vector of all other drugs and the (first order) semantic vectors of their ADRs were retained.
As these inferred pathways connect to drugs through either INTERACTS_WITH or
COMPARED_WITH, they are referred to as triple-predicate pathways.
3.2.2.4. Applying discovery patterns to find possible ADRs (Step 5 in Fig. 4): To
combine query vectors for frequently inferred reasoning pathways into one search
expression, we use a disjunction operation that originates in the quantum logic of Birkhoff
and von Neumann, and was first applied to information retrieval by Widdows and Peters
[91,92]. We define the disjunction of these five query vectors as a query subspace derived
from them using a binary vector approximation [93] of the Gram–Schmidt
orthonormalization procedure [94]. The length of the projection of some other vector in this
subspace provides an estimate of vector-subspace similarity.
For the double-predicate discovery patterns model, a drug’s query subspace was constructed
from this drug’s first-degree semantic vector bound to the vector representations of the five
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

double predicate reasoning pathways most frequently inferred from other drugs. For the
double- and triple-predicate discovery patterns model, a drug’s query subspace also included
this drug’s second-degree semantic vector bound to vector representations of the five
reasoning pathways most frequently inferred from the second-degree semantic vectors of
other drugs.
The length of the projection of the semantic vector for a candidate ADR into a drug’s query
subspace was used to estimate the relatedness between these entities, providing a ranked list
of potential ADRs for each drug.
Fig. 4 provides an overview of the PSI-based analogical reasoning process in its entirety.
3.3. Experimental design

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

An overview of the experimental design is shown in Fig. 5. The first experiment was
conducted without knowledge of drug indications. The concept-based RRI model and
discovery pattern-based PSI model were compared with respect to their ability to identify
known drug/ADR associations. In the second experiment, the model with the best
performance from the first experiment was used to evaluate the effect of eliminating known
indications from the list of predictions.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

3.3.1. Experiment 1 design—Distributional semantic vectors were used to model MMB
and SemMedDB. RRI vectors and PSI vectors formed the basis for our models of LBD
concept-based co-occurrence and LBD discovery patterns, respectively. As MetaMap may
retrieve many more concepts from a particular document than SemRep retrieves
predications, we varied the RRI model to assess the extent to which observed effects were
due to the advantage of a more extensive (albeit less structured) knowledge base. In one
case, a RRI space was derived from only those sentences from which predications were
extracted. Consequently, there are three distributional semantic models – RRI built from
documents (RRI-from-document group), RRI built from predication source sentences (RRIfrom-predication group), and PSI built from predications. The PSI model was evaluated with
two settings. In the first case, only two-predicate discovery patterns were considered (PSIdouble group), while the second case considered both two- and three-predicate patterns
(PSI-double + triple group). The elemental vectors for terms, which are not meaningfully
related to one another, were used to implement a random baseline (Baseline group).
With the RRI models, for each drug, related problems were sought by comparing each
vector in the side effect search space to this drug’s vector representation.
With the PSI model, SIDER2 known drug-side effect pairs were used to infer predicate
paths. For the PSI-double group, each drug’s query subspace was built as the disjunction of
the bound products between the drug and its five double-predicate reasoning pathways. For
the PSI-double + triple group, each drug’s query subspace additionally included the second
degree semantic vector of this drug bound to five triple-predicate paths. The five triplepredicate paths were retrieved by the extension of second degree semantic vectors of drugs.
Comparing a drug’s query subspace with each vector in the search space allowed us to infer
the drug’s possible side effects.

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

3.3.2. Experiment 2 design (Fig. 5)—From our preliminary results, we found that there
were some indications in the inferred ADRs. So we hypothesized that excluding known
indications for drugs from the search space would improve performance. We tested this
hypothesis in the second experiment utilizing knowledge of drug indications from MEDI. In
this experiment, we tested variants of the MEDI indication list using the best performing
model from the first experiment (PSI double + triple group). We extended the MEDIcomplete and MEDI-HPS lists to include all offspring, or immediate offspring nodes based
on the UMLS semantic network utilizing the MRREL.RRF file. This file includes
relationships between UMLS concepts found in the UMLS Metathesaurus [95]. By utilizing
these ancestor-offspring hierarchical relationships, we define an offspring node as a node
that has a MEDI indication as an ancestor (regardless of the number of intervening nodes);
and an immediate offspring node as a node that has this MEDI indication as its parent.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this procedure, we first normalized all MEDI terms. For MEDI drugs, we mapped each
drug’s RxCUI to a UMLS CUI with the RxNorm API [96] and then subsequently searched
the UMLS CUI in SemMedDB and MMB to retrieve the mapped UMLS concept. For MEDI
indications, we mapped each indication’s ICD-9 term to a UMLS CUI using the UTS API
2.0 [80] and then subsequently searched for this UMLS CUI in SemMedDB and MMB to
retrieve the mapped UMLS concept. After normalizing MEDI terms, the hierarchical
relation of synonym (SY), child (CHD), and sibling (SIB) in MRREL.RRF were used to find
drugs’ MEDI indications extended offspring or immediate offspring. Consequently, there
were six MEDI lists (Table 1). These MEDI lists were used to exclude indications from the
side effect search space and were tested in the second experiment.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

3.3.3. Performance measurements—To evaluate performance, we used a number of
widely used metrics. Precision measures the proportion of accurate ADRs in relation to the
total number of ADRs retrieved [97]. To evaluate the precision at different points in a
ranked list, we used Average Precision (AP, the average of the precision values measured at
the point at which each correct result is retrieved for one example [98]). Mean average
precision (MAP) is the average of the AP across all drugs. Precision at k [98] measures the
precision at fixed levels of retrieved results and emphasizes the importance of finding
relevant results early. We evaluated precision at k = 50 (Pk=50). Recall represents the
proportion of ADRs retrieved out of the total number of ADR associations in the reference
standard [97].
We define a “rediscovery” (true discovery) as an adverse effect inferred by a vector model
and subsequently confirmed by SIDER2 as a true prediction. Consequently, the median
rediscovery rank for a particular drug approximates the point in the ranked list produced by
a particular model at which half of the known adverse reactions for this drug were
recovered.
The AP and median rank of the rediscoveries across drugs were compared by the paired t
test and the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test, respectively.
To measure the performance with respect to the true positive rate (TPR) and false positive
rate (FPR), receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was plotted for all drug/ADR pairs

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

for all models. Subsequently, a global area under the ROC curve (AUC, “global” indicates
that the scores of all drug-ADR pairs were combined into a single curve) was calculated
using AUCCalculator [99]. For the model with the best global AUC, a drug-based AUC was
also calculated and compared between drugs.

4. Results
4.1. Experiment 1

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

4.1.1. Inferring discovery patterns—The most strongly associated double-predicate
path was calculated for each known drug/ADR pair. In total, 90,787 predicate paths were
inferred. Among them, there were 1485 unique predicate paths. The five most frequently
inferred double-predicate paths were selected. Second degree semantic vectors for drugs
were constructed by adding together the semantic vector representations of any concept
occurring in a semantic predication with the drug in question, where the predicate type was
either INTERACTS_ WITH or COMPARED_WITH. The most frequently occurring double
predicate paths and inferred triple predicate paths with corresponding examples are shown in
Table 2. They are consistent across all drugs. Many of these paths are readily interpretable,
and could support a plausible biological mechanism for a predicted effect. For example,
INTERACTS_WITH:CAUSES-INV suggests a drug may interfere with some biological
factor which may cause a side effect. COMPARED_WITH:CAUSES-INV can be used to
identify similar side effects by comparing their drug class information as
COMPARED_WITH often indicates a comparative evaluation across different drugs in the
same therapeutic category. Triple predicate paths extend the connecting path for drugs and
related ADRs.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

4.1.2. Performance—Results for different vector models are shown in Table 3. PSI-based
models performed better than RRI-based models and both models perform better than the
random baseline. The PSI-double + triple group outperformed all other groups. All
differences in median rank and MAP were statistically significant (as estimated by
Wilcoxon’s signed rank test and paired t test respectively). Pk=50 for each drug was
compared across groups using Pearson’s correlation. For variants of the same model (RRI or
PSI), Pk=50 was highly correlated (0.75–0.84). Correlation in Pk=50 between the PSI and RRI
models was between 0.52 and 0.57, suggesting the potential to improve performance by
combining results.
4.1.3. AUC—Fig. 6 and Table 3 present the global ROC curves for all models. ROC curve
shows the tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity. The global AUC provides a
cumulative estimate of accuracy, and is shown for each model in Table 3. PSI-double +
triple group has the best global AUC of 0.6841. We measured its AUC at the drug level
(Fig. 7). The mean and median AUC are 0.7102 ± 0.0752 and 0.7058 respectively. Fig. 7
shows a plot of the AUC for each drug against the log of the number of predications in
SemMedDB with this drug as subject. This suggests a trend in which performance is
generally better for those drugs for which more knowledge is available in the database.
Those drugs with an AUC of 0.8 or above tend to occur in 10,000 or more predications as
subject.

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 15

Note that the global AUC as a metric will be inflated by methods that incorporate category
bias into their prediction [100,101], a subject we will return to in the discussion section.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

4.1.4. Rediscovery results—The results of this experiment are illustrated in Fig. 8. This
figure plots the number of rediscovered side effects (left Y axis) and the proportion of the
valid side effects rediscovered (or global recall, right Y axis) for each model against the
mean number of suggested potential ADRs (X axis) at different statistical thresholds. All
distributional models outperform the random baseline.
With approximately 100 predictions per drug, baseline, RRI-from- predication, RRI-fromdocument, PSI-double and PSI-double + triple group have a global recall of 0.029, 0.045,
0.069, 0.088, 0.125, respectively.
4.2. Experiment 2
The PSI-double + triple model was the best performing model in the first experiment, and
was selected to test the effects of using variants of the MEDI list as a way to exclude
therapeutic relationships to reduce the number of highly ranked false positive predictions.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Table 4 presents the performance of the PSI-double + triple model when different MEDI
lists were used. The median rank of true positive predictions was lower when MEDI was
used to exclude the indication from the search space for each drug. However, as median rank
is based on the rank of true positive results only, it does not consider known side effects that
may have been excluded from consideration by the MEDI list. In contrast, MAP also
measures whether true side effects have been excluded. Consequently, MAP in the MEDIcomplete-immediate offspring was higher than other groups. Overall, AUC was highest for
the MEDI-HPS- immediate offspring group. Of the models, only the MEDI-HPS- immediate
offspring group outperformed the baseline PSI model by all metrics, and the improvements
in performance were small in comparison with the differences in performance between
distributional models in experiment 1. All differences between all MEDI intervention groups
and No-MEDI group in Pk=50 are statistically significant as measured by the paired t test.
However, the improvement in cumulative accuracy is negligible.
4.3. Plausibility evidence found by PSI discovery patterns approach

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this paper, the association between rosiglitazone and myocardial infarction, a highly
publicized ADR discovered after the drug was released to the market, is used to illustrate
how evidence from the literature can be retrieved for the evaluation of plausibility by a
domain expert. The term “myocardial_infarction” was ranked in the top 1% (rank = 29) and
top 1.5% (rank = 50) of potential side effects for rosiglitazone by the PSI-double and PSIdouble + triple models respectively.
Rosiglitazone is a thiazolidinedione (TZD) antidiabetic drug, used to treat type 2 diabetes
mellitus as an adjunct to lifestyle changes [102–104]. Since its approval by the FDA in
1999, rosiglitazone was prescribed 3.8 million times annually up to June 2009 in the United
States [105]. A meta-analysis of clinical trials conducted by Nissen and Wolski [106] in
2007 suggested that the use of rosiglitazone was associated with a significant increase in the
risk of myocardial infarction. This led to rosiglitazone’s withdrawal from the European
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

market in 2010 and a rosiglitazone black-box warning in the U.S. [105,107]. In 2013, the
FDA lifted some prescription restrictions in the U.S. market based on a reevaluation of the
Rosiglitazone Evaluated for Cardiac Outcomes and Regulation of Glycaemia in Diabetes
(RECORD) trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier NCT00379769) [108], but the European
suspension is still in effect at the time of this writing.
Rosiglitazone is a nuclear peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR-gamma)
agonist. The mechanism through which rosiglitazone causes cardiovascular events is
unclear, but is thought to be related to unfavorable effects on triglycerides, low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) particle size and density, and greater affinity for PPARgamma than other TZD drugs [109– 112]. To evaluate the extent to which these hypotheses
were consistent with information utilized by the PSI-double + triple model, we reconstructed
the pathways of predicates and concepts that were consistent with the inferred discovery
patterns used to make this prediction.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For myocardial infarction, each discovery pattern that was used for the inference was used to
search the indexed SemMedDB predications and find middle terms that connect
rosiglitazone with myocardial infarction through the discovery pattern. The middle terms
retrieved were ranked based on their inverse document frequency. Since the indexed
SemMedDB predications contain the source literature ID (PMID), we also retrieved related
literature evidence that supports the prediction.
Consequently 108,100 unique predication pathways were retrieved through 8 unique
predicate paths (Table 5) with distinct middle terms that connect rosiglitazone with
myocardial infarction. Table 6 shows some example predication pathways, that were
composed of two or three predications. There were around 17 sentences providing evidence
to support each predication on average. We analyzed middle terms’ semantic groups [113]
and list the sample with distinct predicate paths connecting with different semantic groups
(Fig. 9).
There were 2618 distinct predication pathways about “triglycerides”, “LDL lipoprotein” and
“PPAR-gamma” specifying 247 unique middle terms.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Drilling down, Fig. 10 shows the connecting concepts between LDL-C and myocardial
infarction that fall along the reasoning pathways employed by the PSI-double + triple model.
In each reasoning pathway, the middle terms were ranked using inverse document
frequency, to approximate the weighting used by the predictive model. For each predication
in these pathways, the source sentences from the literature were retrieved. For example, the
article “A comparison of lipid and glycemic effects of pioglitazone and rosiglitazone in
patients with type 2 diabetes and dyslipidemia” [143] explains that rosiglitazone increased
triglycerides compared with pioglitazone and has different effect on plasma lipids which
may contribute to heart disease. Fig. 10 shows the middle terms retrieved to justify that
rosiglitazone may cause myocardial infarction via LDL-C.
The capacity to retrieve and organize knowledge in this way suggests a new paradigm for
information retrieval in which information supporting a hypothesis of interest is
automatically aggregated and organized at the conceptual level. However, as the number of
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

assertions in the literature far exceeds the number of documents, further research is needed
to develop methods through which to prioritize these assertions, and present them in a
manner conducive to human consumption.

5. Discussion

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

This study evaluates the ability of scalable LBD methods based on distributional semantics
to rank the plausibility of connections between drugs and potential ADRs. We find that both
the RRI and PSI models are able to retrieve known side effects of drugs, but PSI performs
this task better, as one would anticipate given the additional information beyond cooccurrence that it encodes. The PSI model can further provide the reasoning pathways that
were used to link a drug to a predicted side effect. Consequently, relevant literature can be
retrieved to support the predictions, and provided to experts for review. However further
research is needed to develop approaches through which the assertions underlying the large
numbers of reasoning pathways utilized by the model can be prioritized for expert review, as
these are too numerous for exhaustive manual review. Ultimately, we aim to provide domain
experts with essential evidence while preventing information over-load. Even though it is
not the best performing model, the RRI model has the advantages of a simple training
process and the availability of more data to draw upon (as MetaMap has higher recall for
concepts than SemRep has for predications). Conversely, the PSI model has the advantage
of modeling plausibility, a capability with the potential to assist expert clinical review for
pharmacovigilance. In addition, the correlation analysis between groups suggests that RRI
and PSI complement each other, and can potentially be combined to improve performance
on this task.
For predicting ADRs, several statistical models and ML algorithms have been evaluated
against an edition of SIDER, or a subset of this repository. In addition to methodological
differences, these approaches have leveraged different data sets and a variety of knowledge
bases as a basis for making predictions. In the section that follows, we will provide a review
of these approaches, and the performance they have documented for the prediction of ADRs
in SIDER.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Pauwel’s et al. represented drugs using as features the presence or absence of chemical
substructure components described in PubChem [144]. In addition to standard supervised
ML approaches, they applied canonical correlation analysis (CCA), including a sparse
variant that emphasizes a small number of informative features for each training example.
These methods were used to predict SIDER side effects, with a reported global AUC of
0.8932 [145] on a set of 1350 ADR and 888 drugs, using fivefold cross-validation.
Subsequently, Liu et al. applied five supervised ML algorithms to the same SIDER set. In
addition to the PubChem-derived chemical substructure features used by Pauwel’s et al.,
features were drawn from DrugBank [146] (drug targets, transporters, and enzymes), KEGG
[147] (pathway information) and SIDER itself (drug indications and side effects). A
classifier was built for each SIDER ADR, and the classifiers were then evaluated on 832
SIDER drugs (for which DrugBank IDs could be found) using fivefold cross-validation. The
support vector machine (SVM) algorithm performed best with a global AUC of 0.9524 on

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

the full SIDER dataset [101]. The authors attribute much of the improvement in
performance by this and other metrics to the effects of incorporating SIDER side effects as
features, suggesting that certain side effects have a tendency to co-occur in drug label data.
Other authors have reported performance on subsets of SIDER using similar methods. For
cardio-toxicity related ADRs in SIDER, a median AUC of 0.771 using SVM for prediction
has been reported [148]. In this case, features were selected from information about intended
drug targets in DrugBank, and information about off-target effects from an expanded
protein–protein interaction network developed using gene ontology (GO) annotations. A
SVM classifier was built for each evaluated ADR and cross-validated on SIDER.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

With respect to performance, two of these studies, Pauwels et al. [145] and Liu et al. [101]
report a global AUC of close to 0.9 or higher with the best of their methods. Though our
results are not directly comparable as we made predictions on a per-drug rather than a perADR basis, the difference between the global AUC of these methods and that obtained with
our approach seems large. However this difference in global AUC is misleading. As noted
by Liu and colleagues in their paper, the imbalance between positive and negative examples
across ADRs and the way in which the global AUC was calculated in this work leads to an
apparent inconsistency between it and the other evaluation metrics presented. For example,
Pauwels and his colleagues display the AUC across different ADRs in a series of box plots,
which shows a median AUC for the best-performing method (by this metric) of slightly
above 0.6. Acknowledging this issue, Liu et al. also report precision and recall for each
evaluated method with, for example, precision of 0.66 and recall of 0.63 for SVMs with
their maximal feature set. Notably, the AUC in this case was around 0.95.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

This apparent inconsistency can be explained by the effect of the prevalence of positive
examples for each ADR on the prediction strength. This is readily apparent for simple
algorithms such as Naive Bayes, where the prior probability of a given category is
incorporated into the estimate. However, it is also an issue for more sophisticated algorithms
such as SVM [100] particularly when the imbalance between categories is severe. This is the
case for many of the ADR examples: Liu et al. report a positive to negative ratio of around
1:166 for 554 of the 1135 ADRs. So given the same set of features, instances in these cases
are likely to receive a lower prediction score than those in balanced cases. When these
scores are aggregated across examples to generate a global AUC, ML methods that
incorporate the category bias will obtain an inflated global AUC on account of this tendency
to assign lower scores to instances with few positive examples. However, as noted by Liu et
al. and demonstrated by the other reported metrics, this AUC is not an accurate reflection of
the ability of these models to detect positive examples.
To simulate the effects of category bias on global AUC, we performed a simple experiment
in which we multiplied the similarity scores produced by our model by the proportion of
positive examples for each drug. This roughly approximates the effects of an accurately
estimated prior class probability during cross-validation experiments. This resulted in an
increase of our global AUC from 0.68 to 0.88. We do not present this result for the purpose
of comparative evaluation, as our experiments are not directly comparable with prior ML
work for other reasons we will subsequently discuss. Rather, we present it as an illustration

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

of the disproportionate influence of category bias on global AUC, which underscores the
issues with this evaluation metric raised by Liu et al. We trust it will also serve to dispel the
misleading impression that the predictive accuracy of our methods is vastly inferior to that
reported previously.
As our method does not consider the number of ADRs associated with a particular drug, the
global AUC and median AUC approximately agree with one another. Our median AUC
(across all drugs) of 0.7058, which falls somewhere in between that reported by Pauwels et
al. [145] (across all ADRs) and Huang et al. [148] (across cardio-toxicity related ADRs
only). On account of the difference in denominator these results are not directly comparable,
but they do further illustrate the discrepancy between global and local AUC in models that
are not agnostic to class imbalance. Arguably such agnosticism is desirable from the
perspective of an expert review, as it is difficult to justify the assertion that those drugs with
fewer known associated side effects should be considered less likely to cause some newly
observed side effect (and vice versa).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

With respect to methodological differences, all of the above methods are supervised ML
methods, and were applied to infer whether or not drugs were associated with each ADR
from the features of other drugs known to be associated with this ADR. So the predictive
models were generally customized on a per-ADR basis, for example by generating an
individual classifier for each ADR in the case of SVM. In contrast, our approach infers a set
of abstract reasoning pathways that were consistent across the drugs we evaluated. However,
as illustrated by the absence of evidence across certain pathways in the rosiglitazone
example, some pathways may be more predictive for particular medications or ADRs. So it
seems likely that we could further improve our performance by incorporating supervised
ML, a direction we plan to explore in future work.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Our approach differs with respect to the knowledge sources utilized also. For example,
KEGG and DrugBank are manually curated databases. Our knowledge base, SemMedDB,
contains predications that have been automatically extracted by SemRep from the
biomedical literature using NLP. Inaccuracies in language processing, or indeed in the
literature itself may introduce sources of error that are not present in manually curated data.
However, the scope of the literature is much broader than that of human-curated resources.
Furthermore, as there is no agreed-upon gold standard for ADRs, different studies have
utilized different datasets as reference sets [149]. Our study employed SIDER2, which
includes considerably more drugs and ADRs than SIDER1.
This work has several limitations. The first of these concerns the use of SIDER2 as a
reference standard. As SIDER2 consists of recognized side effects only, we cannot reliably
distinguish between false positive signals and previously unknown ADRs. Furthermore,
SIDER was compiled from package insert information by NLP tools [79], and as such may
include side effects that seldom occur in practice or false associations that were caused by
text-mining errors [150]. While SIDER2 is sufficient to evaluate the hypotheses of the
current work, in future work we plan to incorporate other data sources, such as EHR data
and FDA reports. These data sources may provide additional evidence to support the
assertion that an unknown drug/ADR pair is worth investigating further. Alternatively, they

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 20

may provide the means to select a subset of the side effects in SIDER2 that have been
observed frequently in practice as an additional evaluation set.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Secondly, the MMB repository contains one year less literature than the SemMedDB
dataset. There is a difference of 1,7579,64 citations (7.9% of SemMedDB dataset). These
were the newest datasets at the time of the experiment. However the MMB repository has
many more data points than SemMedDB. For example, more than 99.99% of citations have
concepts extracted by MetaMap and 59.91% of citations have predications extracted by
SemRep.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Another concern is the existing knowledge about causal relationships between drugs and
related ADRs from the literature. For our dataset (90,787 pairs), 45% of pairs (concerning
953 drugs) co-occur directly in the MMB repository and 5% of pairs (concerning 693 drugs)
have direct causal relationship (drug CAUSES ADR) in SemMedDB. So PSI’s accuracy is
dependent upon its ability to meaningfully infer connections between concepts that were not
previously linked in its database, a capacity that would be particularly useful as a means of
assessing novel ADRs that had not previously been documented in the literature. RRI is also
able to draw such inferences, but in this case more of its performance may be attributable to
direct co-occurrence.
Inspecting the middle terms that our model retrieved for rosiglitazone- MI association (Fig.
10), we found that at times uninformative high-level concepts, such as “genes” and
“proteins”, were retrieved. In our study, we addressed the issue of uninformative high level
concepts in two ways, both related to their propensity to occur relatively frequently in the
corpus. Firstly we used a frequency threshold of 1,000,000 to exclude frequently occurring
concepts contained in SemMedDB. The frequency of “genes” and “proteins” is less than the
threshold and cannot be filtered. Secondly, we used a weighting procedure to reduce the
influence of high-frequency terms on the training process. However, more sophisticated
approaches to filtering are possible. Information concerning UMLS semantic types and
position in the UMLS hierarchy could be used to develop more sophisticated approaches, to
further filter out uninformative high-level concepts, which may improve performance.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The predictions made by PSI depend upon assertions extracted from the biomedical
literature. One concern about the extracted predications is that they may be implausible on
account of NLP errors. Though SemRep has been optimized for precision, its precision is
not perfect. For example, Kilicoglu et al. estimate the precision of SemRep to be around
0.77 [151]. Based on this, and other published evaluations [152,69], it is reasonable to
estimate that around three in four predications in the set are perfectly accurate. In many
cases, inaccurate predications nonetheless indicate cooccurrence, which is also informative.
The PSI-based analogical reasoning approach we have employed is robust to isolated
language processing errors, as highly ranked predictions are based on assertions extracted
from thousands of unique reasoning pathways. For example, for the rosiglitazone-MI
association, 108,100 unique predications were retrieved, spanning eight of the inferred
reasoning pathways. On average, individual predications were supported by 17 excerpts
from the literature. If we extrapolate from prior published evaluations of SemRep, the
predication concerned would have been accurately extracted from around 12 of these

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

excerpts. So it is likely that at least some of the evidence supporting each individual
assertion is accurate. Moreover, as this method is distributional in nature, it does not require
that these assertions be perfectly accurate. Rather, the frequency with which an assertion is
extracted factors into the strength of its contribution to a reasoning pathway. Nonetheless,
the biomedical literature may contain controversial assertions, or contradictory conclusions
from different experts or different experiments. This is illustrated by the rosiglitazone (brand
name: Avandia) case. In 2007, the FDA added a black-box warning for heart-related risks to
Avandia based on a meta-analysis [106] and three other studies [153]. In 2013, the FDA
lifted certain Avandia prescribing restrictions based on the readjudicated results of the
RECORD trial [154,155], claiming the initial concerns were overblown [108]. This decision
was condemned by one of the authors of the original meta-analysis [156]. Currently our
models weight the contribution of assertions using statistics related to local and global
frequency. However, it would also be possible to weight the importance of these assertions
based on some assessment of the reliability of the source. For example, in information
retrieval experiments, an approach incorporating citation information was better able to
identify articles considered as important in a preexisting bibliography [157]. Possibilities
include weights derived from the citation count of the source article, the impact factor of the
journal, or the nature of the experiment described. It is possible that weighting metrics of
this source would improve the predictions of our models, and they also suggest approaches
to prioritize the large numbers of assertions supporting our predictions for review by human
experts.

6. Conclusion

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this research, an emerging, scalable method of LBD that uses distributional statistics to
infer and apply discovery patterns was adapted to evaluate the plausibility of drug/ADR
relationships for the purpose of pharmacovigilance. The effective application of large
amounts of partially accurate biomedical knowledge to this problem was facilitated by the
scalable and robust nature of approximate inference in geometric space. This approach was
shown to be more effective than a comparable co-occurrence based baseline, and has the
further benefit of permitting the retrieval of evidence underlying the assertions used by the
system to make its predictions. Consequently, our approach provides the means to assist
with expert clinical review by providing evidence supporting the plausibility of the
connection between drugs and ADRs. Furthermore, the models we have developed can be
applied to filter drug/ADR signals that are detected in spontaneous reporting systems or
EHR data, a direction we plan to explore in future work.

Acknowledgments
The work was supported by the U.S. National Library of Medicine Grant (1R01LM011563), Using Biomedical
Knowledge to Identify Plausible Signals for Pharmacovigilance. This work was also supported in part by the
Intramural Research Program of the U.S. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine. The authors
would like to thank Peter Davies for his comments on the paper, and for discussions regarding the implications of
these methods for the evaluation of potential ADRs.

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 22

References
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1. Edwards IR, Aronson JK. Adverse drug reactions: definitions, diagnosis, and management. Lancet.
2000; 356(9237):1255–9. [PubMed: 11072960]
2. Lazarou J, Pomeranz B, Corey P. Incidence of adverse drug reactions in hospitalized patients.
JAMA: J Amer Med Assoc. 1998; 279(15):1200–5.
3. Hamilton RA, Briceland LL, Andritz MH. Frequency of hospitalization after exposure to known
drug–drug interactions in a medicaid population. Pharmacother: J Human Pharmacol Drug Ther.
1998; 18(5):1112–20.
4. Baker GR, Norton PG, Flintoft V, Blais R, Brown A, Cox J, et al. The Canadian adverse events
study: the incidence of adverse events among hospital patients in Canada. Can Med Assoc J. 2004;
170(11):1678–86. [PubMed: 15159366]
5. Bourgeois FT, Mandl KD, Valim C, Shannon MW. Pediatric adverse drug events in the outpatient
setting: an 11-year national analysis. Pediatrics. 2009; 124(4):e744–50. [PubMed: 19786435]
6. DiMasi JA, Hansen RW, Grabowski HG. The price of innovation: new estimates of drug
development costs. J Health Econ. 2003; 22(2):151–85. [PubMed: 12606142]
7. Rawlins MD. Spontaneous reporting of adverse drug reactions. I: The data. Brit J Clin Pharmacol.
1988; 26(1):1–5. [PubMed: 3203052]
8. Rawlins MD. Spontaneous reporting of adverse drug reactions. II:, Uses. Brit J Clin Pharmacol.
1988; 26(1):7–11. [PubMed: 3203063]
9. Van Puijenbroek EP, Diemont WL, van Grootheest K. Application of quantitative signal detection
in the Dutch spontaneous reporting system for adverse drug reactions. Drug Saf. 2003; 26(5):293–
301. [PubMed: 12650632]
10. Hasford J, Goettler M, Munter K-H, Müller-Oerlinghausen B. Physicians’ knowledge and attitudes
regarding the spontaneous reporting system for adverse drug reactions. J Clin Epidemiol. 2002;
55(9):945–50. [PubMed: 12393084]
11. Alvarez-Requejo A, Carvajal A, Begaud B, Moride Y, Vega T, Arias LM. Under-reporting of
adverse drug reactions estimate based on a spontaneous reporting scheme and a sentinel system.
Europ J Clin Pharmacol. 1998; 54(6):483–8.
12. Wang X, Hripcsak G, Markatou M, Friedman C. Active computerized pharmacovigilance using
natural language processing, statistics, and electronic health records: a feasibility study. J Amer
Med Info Assoc. 2009; 16(3):328–37.
13. Trifirò G, Pariente A, Coloma PM, Kors JA, Polimeni G, Miremont-Salamé G, et al. Data mining
on electronic health record databases for signal detection in pharmacovigilance: which events to
monitor? Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2009; 18(12):1176–84. [PubMed: 19757412]
14. Haerian K, Varn D, Vaidya S, Ena L, Chase HS, Friedman C. Detection of pharmacovigilancerelated adverse events using electronic health records and automated methods. Clin Pharmacol
Ther. 2012; 92(2):228–34. [PubMed: 22713699]
15. Harpaz R, Vilar S, DuMouchel W, Salmasian H, Haerian K, Shah NH, et al. Combing signals from
spontaneous reports and electronic health records for detection of adverse drug reactions. J Amer
Med Info Assoc. 2013; 20(3):413–9.
16. Friedman, C. Discovering novel adverse drug events using natural language processing and mining
of the electronic health record. In: Combi, C.; Shahar, Y.; Abu-Hanna, A., editors. Artificial
intelligence in medicine. Lecture notes in computer science. Vol. 5651. Berlin Heidelberg:
Springer; 2009. p. 1-5.
17. Oliveira JL, Lopes P, Nunes T, Campos D, Boyer S, Ahlberg E, et al. The EU-ADR web platform:
delivering advanced pharmacovigilance tools. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2013; 22(5):459–67.
[PubMed: 23208789]
18. Deftereos SN, Andronis C, Friedla EJ, Persidis A, Persidis A. Drug repurposing and adverse event
prediction using high-throughput literature analysis. Wiley Interdisciplinary Rev: Systems Biol
Med. 2011; 3(3):323–34.
19. Bauer-Mehren A, van Mullingen EM, Avillach P, del Carmen Carrascosa M, Garcia-Serna R,
Piñero J, et al. Automatic filtering and substantiation of drug safety signals. PLoS Comput Biol.
2012; 8(4):e1002457. [PubMed: 22496632]

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

20. Shetty KD, Dalal SR. Using information mining of the medical literature to improve drug safety. J
Amer Med Info Assoc. 2011; 18(5):668–74.
21. Merck. Merck announces voluntary worldwide withdrawal of VIOXX. 2004. <http://
www.merck.com/newsroom/vioxx/pdf/vioxx_press_release_final.pdf>
22. EMA. European medicines agency recommends suspension of Avandia, Avandamet and Avaglim.
2010. Press release
23. Ye, J-p. Challenges in drug discovery for thiazolidinedione substitute. Acta Pharmaceut Sinica B.
2011; 1(3):137–42.
24. Blind E, Dunder K, De Graeff P, Abadie E. Rosiglitazone: a European regulatory perspective.
Diabetologia. 2010; 54(2):213–8. [PubMed: 21153629]
25. Anderson N, Borlak J. Correlation versus Causation? Pharmacovigilance of the analgesic flupirtine
exemplifies the need for refined spontaneous ADR reporting. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6(10):e25221.
[PubMed: 22022383]
26. WHO. Pharmacovigilance. 2010. <http://www.who.int/medicines/areas/quality_safety/
safety_efficacy/pharmvigi/en/index.html>
27. Ahmad SR. Adverse drug event monitoring at the food and drug administration. J Gener Intern
Med. 2003; 18(1):57–60.
28. Kessler DA, Natanblut S, Kennedy D, Lazar E, Rheinstein P, Anello C, et al. Introducing
MEDWatch: a new approach to reporting medication and device adverse effects and product
problems. JAMA: J Amer Med Assoc. 1993; 269(21):2765–8.
29. Wysowski DK, Swartz L. Adverse drug event surveillance and drug withdrawals in the United
States, 1969–2002: the importance of reporting suspected reactions. Arch Intern Med. 2005;
165(12):1363. [PubMed: 15983284]
30. Edwards IR. The WHO Database – I. Drug Info J. 1992; 26(4):477–80.
31. Bate, A. Dissertation. Umeå University; 2003. The use of Bayesian confidence propagation neural
network in pharmacovigilance.
32. Edwards IR, Biriell C. Harmonisation in pharmacovigilance. Drug Saf. 1994; 10(2):93–102.
[PubMed: 8011183]
33. Collins FS. Reengineering translational science: the time is right. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3(90):
90cm17.
34. Bate A, Lindquist M, Edwards I, Olsson S, Orre R, Lansner A, et al. A Bayesian neural network
method for adverse drug reaction signal generation. Europ J Clin Pharmacol. 1998; 54(4):315–21.
35. Lindquist M, Edwards IR, Bate A, Fucik H, Nunes AM, Ståhl M. From association to alert – a
revised approach to international signal analysis. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 1999; 8(Suppl
1):S15–25. [PubMed: 15073883]
36. Noren GN, Bate A, Orre R, Edwards IR. Extending the methods used to screen the WHO drug
safety database towards analysis of complex associations and improved accuracy for rare events.
Statist Med. 2006; 25(21):3740–57.
37. Lindquist M, Ståhl M, Bate A, Edwards IR, Meyboom RH. A retrospective evaluation of a data
mining approach to aid finding new adverse drug reaction signals in the WHO international
database. Drug Saf. 2000; 23(6):533–42. [PubMed: 11144660]
38. DuMouchel W. Bayesian data mining in large frequency tables, with an application to the FDA
spontaneous reporting system. Amer Statist. 1999; 53(3):177–90.
39. DuMouchel, W.; Pregibon, D. Empirical Bayes screening for multi-item associations. Proceedings
of the seventh ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining;
ACM; 2001. p. 67-76.
40. Shakir SA, Layton D. Causal association in pharmacovigilance and pharmacoepidemiology:
thoughts on the application of the Austin Bradford-Hill criteria. Drug Saf. 2002; 25(6):467–71.
[PubMed: 12071785]
41. Hill AB. The environment and disease: association or causation? Proceed Roy Society Med. 1965;
58(5):295.
42. Doll R. Austin Bradford Hill 8 July 1897–18 April 1991. Biogr Mem Fellows Roy Society. 1994;
40:128–40.

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

43. Ward AC. The role of causal criteria in causal inferences: Bradford Hill’s “aspects of association”.
Epidemiol Perspect Innov. 2009; 6(1):2. [PubMed: 19534788]
44. Kleinberg S, Hripcsak G. A review of causal inference for biomedical informatics. J Biomed Info.
2011; 44(6):1102–12.
45. Perrio M, Voss S, Shakir SA. Application of the Bradford Hill criteria to assess the causality of
cisapride-induced arrhythmia: a model for assessing causal association in pharmacovigilance.
Drug Saf. 2007; 30(4):333–46. [PubMed: 17408310]
46. Swanson DR. Undiscovered public knowledge. Libr Quart. 1986:103–18.
47. Swanson DR. Two medical literatures that are logically but not bibliographically connected. J
Amer Society Info Sci. 1987; 38(4):228–33.
48. Weeber M, Klein H, de Jong-van den Berg L, Vos R. Using concepts in literature-based discovery:
simulating Swanson’s Raynaud-fish oil and migraine–magnesium discoveries. J Amer Society
Info Sci Tech. 2001; 52(7):548–57.
49. Bruza, PD.; Weeber, M. Literature-based discovery. Springer; 2008.
50. Swanson DR. Fish oil, Raynaud’s syndrome, and undiscovered public knowledge. Perspect Biol
Med. 1986; 30(1):7. [PubMed: 3797213]
51. Swanson DR. Migraine and magnesium: eleven neglected connections. Perspect Biol Med. 1988;
31(4):526–57. [PubMed: 3075738]
52. Smalheiser NR, Swanson DR. Linking estrogen to Alzheimer’s disease: an informatics approach.
Neurology. 1996; 47(3):809–10. [PubMed: 8797484]
53. Srinivasan, P.; Rindflesch, TC. Exploring text mining from MEDLINE. Proceedings of the AMIA
symposium; 2002. p. 722-6.
54. Hristovski, D.; Friedman, C.; Rindflesch, TC.; Peterlin, B. Exploiting semantic relations for
literature-based discovery. AMIA annual symposium proceeding; 2006. p. 349-53.
55. Yetisgen-Yildiz M, Pratt W. Using statistical and knowledge-based approaches for literature-based
discovery. J Biomed Info. 2006; 39(6):600–11.
56. Sehgal, AK.; Qiu, XY.; Srinivasan, P. Literature-based discovery. Springer; 2008. Analyzing LBD
methods using a general framework; p. 75-100.
57. Yetisgen-Yildiz M, Pratt W. A new evaluation methodology for literature-based discovery
systems. J Biomed Info. 2009; 42(4):633–43.
58. Rindflesch TC, Fiszman M. The interaction of domain knowledge and linguistic structure in
natural language processing: interpreting hypernymic propositions in biomedical text. J Biomed
Info. 2003; 36(6):462–77.
59. Chen L, Friedman C. Extracting phenotypic information from the literature via natural language
processing. Stud Health Tech Info. 2004; 107:758–62.
60. Hristovski, D.; Friedman, C.; Rindflesch, TC.; Peterlin, B. Literature-based knowledge discovery
using natural language processing. In: Bruza, P.; Weeber, M., editors. Literature-based discovery,
no. 15 in information science and knowledge management. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer; 2008. p.
133-52.
61. Ahlers, CB.; Hristovski, D.; Kilicoglu, H.; Rindflesch, TC. Using the literature-based discovery
paradigm to investigate drug mechanisms. AMIA, Annual Symposium Proceedings; 2007. p. 6-10.
62. Hristovski, D.; Burgun-Parenthoine, A.; Avillach, P.; Rindflesch, TC. Quality of life through
quality of information, MIE2012. 2012a. Towards using literature-based discovery to explain drug
adverse effects.
63. Hristovski, D.; Burgun-Parenthoine, A.; Avillach, P.; Rindflesch, TC. Using literature-based
discovery to explain drug adverse effects. AMIA, annual symposium proceedings; 2012b.
64. Aronson, AR. Effective mapping of biomedical text to the UMLS metathesaurus: the MetaMap
program. Proceedings of the AMIA symposium; 2001. p. 17-21.
65. Aronson AR, Lang F-M. An overview of MetaMap: historical perspective and recent advances. J
Amer Med Info Assoc. 2010; 17(3):229–36.
66. Rindflesch, TC.; Fiszman, M.; Libbus, B. Semantic interpretation for the biomedical research
literature. In: Chen, H.; Fuller, SS.; Friedman, C.; Hersh, W., editors. Medical informatics, no. 8 in
integrated series in information systems. US: Springer; 2005. p. 399-422.

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

67. Aronson, AR.; Rindflesch, TC. A report to the Board of Scientific Counselors. 1998. Semantic
knowledge representation project.
68. Rindflesch TC, Aronson AR. Semantic processing for enhanced access to biomedical knowledge.
Real World Semantic Web Appl. 2002:157–72.
69. Kilicoglu, H.; Fiszman, M.; Rosemblat, G.; Marimpietri, S.; Rindflesch, TC. Arguments of
nominals in semantic interpretation of biomedical text. Proceedings of the 2010 workshop on
biomedical natural language processing; 2010. p. 46-54.
70. Lindsay RK, Gordon MD. Literature-based discovery by lexical statistics. J Amer Society Info Sci.
1999; 50(7):574–87.
71. Cohen T, Widdows D. Empirical distributional semantics: methods and biomedical applications. J
Biomed Info. 2009; 42(2):390–405.
72. Cole, RJ.; Bruza, PD. A bare bones approach to literature-based discovery: an analysis of the
Raynaud’s/fish-oil and migraine–magnesium discoveries in semantic space. In: Hoffmann, A.;
Motoda, H.; Scheffer, T., editors. Discovery science. Lecture notes in computer science. Vol.
3735. Berlin/ Heidelberg: Springer; 2005. p. 84-98.
73. Gordon MD, Dumais S. Using latent semantic indexing for literature based discovery. J Amer
Society Info Sci. 1998; 49(8):674–85.
74. Cohen T, Schvaneveldt R, Widdows D. Reflective random indexing and indirect inference: a
scalable method for discovery of implicit connections. J Biomed Info. 2010; 43(2):240–56.
75. Kanerva P, Kristofersson J, Holst A. Random indexing of text samples for latent semantic analysis.
Proceedings of the 22nd annual conference of the cognitive science society. 2000; 1036:1036–7.
76. Kanerva, P. What we mean when we say “What’s, the dollar of mexico?: prototypes and mapping
in concept space”. Proc AAAI, fall symp on quantum informatics for cognitive, social, and
semantic processes; 2010.
77. Cohen T, Widdows D, Schvaneveldt RW, Davies P, Rindflesch TC. Discovering discovery
patterns with predication-based semantic indexing. J Biomed Info. 2012; 45(6):1049–65.
78. Landauer TK, Dumais ST. A solution to Plato’s problem: the latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge. Psych Rev. 1997; 104(2):211.
79. Kuhn M, Campillos M, Letunic I, Jensen LJ, Bork P. A side effect resource to capture phenotypic
effects of drugs. Mol Systems Biol. 2010; 6:343.
80. U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health. UMLS Terminology Services
(UTS) API 2.0. 2012. <http://uts.nlm.nih.gov/metathesaurus.html>
81. Wei W-Q, Cronin RM, Xu H, Lasko TA, Bastarache L, Denny JC. Development and evaluation of
an ensemble resource linking medications to their indications. J Amer Med Info Assoc. 2013;
20(5):954–61.
82. Kanerva P. Hyperdimensional computing: an introduction to computing in distributed
representation with high-dimensional random vectors. Cognitive Computat. 2009; 1(2):139–59.
83. Widdows, D.; Cohen, T. Real, complex, and binary semantic vectors. Proc sixth intl symp on
quantum interactions; Paris, France: Springer; 2012. p. 24-35.
84. Kanerva, P. ICANN’94. Springer; 1994. The spatter code for encoding concepts at many levels; p.
226-9.
85. Plate TA. Holographic reduced representations. IEEE Trans Neural Networks. 1995; 6(3):623–41.
86. Kanerva, P. Artificial neural networks – ICANN 96. Springer; 1996. Binary spatter-coding of
ordered K-tuples; p. 869-73.
87. Gayler, RW. Vector symbolic architectures answer Jackendoff’s challenges for cognitive
neuroscience. arXiv preprint cs/0412059
88. Wahle, M.; Widdows, D.; Herskovic, JR.; Bernstam, EV.; Cohen, T. Deterministic binary vectors
for efficient automated indexing of MEDLINE/PubMed abstracts. AMIA annual symposium
proceedings; American Medical Informatics Association; 2012. p. 940
89. Dumais ST. Improving the retrieval of information from external sources. Behav Res Methods
Instruments Computer. 1991; 23(2):229–36.

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

90. Cohen, T.; Widdows, D.; Schvaneveldt, RW.; Rindflesch, TC. Discovery at a distance: farther
journeys in predication space. Bioinformatics and biomedicine workshops (BIBMW), 2012 IEEE
international conference on; 2012b. p. 218-25.
91. Birkhoff G, Von Neumann J. The logic of quantum mechanics. Ann Math. 1936:823–43.
92. Widdows D, Peters S. Word vectors and quantum logic: experiments with negation and
disjunction. Math Lang. 2003; 8(141)
93. Cohen, T.; Widdows, D.; De Vine, L.; Schvaneveldt, R.; Rindflesch, TC. Quantum interaction.
Springer; 2012. Many paths lead to discovery: analogical retrieval of cancer therapies; p. 90-101.
94. Golub, GH.; Van Loan, CF. Matrix computations. Vol. 3. JHU Press; 2012.
95. National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville
Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 Usa. Metathesaurus – Rich Release Format (RRF). 2009. <http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK9685/>
96. U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health. RxNorm API. 2013. <http://
rxnav.nlm.nih.gov/RxNormAPI.html>
97. Salton G, Fox EA, Wu H. Extended Boolean information retrieval. Communications ACM. 1983;
26(11):1022–36.
98. Manning, CD.; Raghavan, P.; Schütze, H. Introduction to information retrieval. Vol. 1. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press; 2008.
99. Davis, J.; Goadrich, M. The relationship between precision–recall and ROC curves. Proceedings of
the 23rd international conference on Machine learning; 2006. p. 233-40.
100. Akbani, R.; Kwek, S.; Japkowicz, N. Machine learning: ECML 2004. Springer; 2004. Applying
support vector machines to imbalanced datasets; p. 39-50.
101. Liu M, Wu Y, Chen Y, Sun J, Zhao Z, Chen X-w, et al. Large-scale prediction of adverse drug
reactions using chemical, biological, and phenotypic properties of drugs. J Amer Med Info
Assoc. 2012; 19(e1):e28–35.
102. Hamblin M, Chang L, Fan Y, Zhang J, Chen YE. PPARs and the cardiovascular system.
Antioxidants Redox Signaling. 2009; 11(6):1415–52. [PubMed: 19061437]
103. Cheung BM. Behind the rosiglitazone controversy. Exper Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2010; 3(6):723–5.
104. Lygate CA, Hulbert K, Monfared M, Cole MA, Clarke K, Neubauer S. The PPARγ-activator
rosiglitazone does not alter remodeling but increases mortality in rats post-myocardial infarction.
Cardiov Res. 2003; 58(3):632–7.
105. Shah ND, Montori VM, Krumholz HM, Tu K, Alexander GC, Jackevicius CA, et al. Responding
to an FDA, warning – geographic variation in the use of rosiglitazone. New England J Med.
2010; 363(22):2081–4. [PubMed: 21083379]
106. Nissen SE, Wolski K. Effect of rosiglitazone on the risk of myocardial infarction and death from
cardiovascular causes. New England J Med. 2007; 356:2457–71. [PubMed: 17517853]
107. Berthet S, Olivier P, Montastruc J-L, Lapeyre-Mestre M. Drug safety of rosiglitazone and
pioglitazone in France: a study using the French PharmacoVigilance database. BMC Pharmacol
Toxicol. 2011; 11(1):5.
108. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Press announcements – FDA, requires removal of certain
restrictions on the diabetes drug Avandia. 2013. <http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/
PressAnnouncements/ucm376516.htm>
109. Loke YK, Kwok CS, Singh S. Comparative cardiovascular effects of thiazolidinediones:
systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. BMJ: Brit Med J. 2011;
342(7):d1309.
110. Goldberg RB, Kendall DM, Deeg MA, Buse JB, Zagar AJ, Pinaire JA, et al. A comparison of
lipid and glycemic effects of pioglitazone and rosiglitazone in patients with type 2 diabetes and
dyslipidemia. Diabetes Care. 2005; 28(7):1547–54. [PubMed: 15983299]
111. Khanderia U, Pop-Busui R, Eagle KA. Thiazolidinediones in type 2 diabetes: a cardiology
perspective. Ann Pharmacother. 2008; 42(10):1466–74. [PubMed: 18698014]
112. Bourg CA, Phillips BB. Rosiglitazone, myocardial ischemic risk, and recent regulatory actions.
Ann Pharmacother. 2012; 46(2):282–9. [PubMed: 22298606]

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

113. Bodenreider O, McCray AT. Exploring semantic groups through visual approaches. J Biomed
Info. 2003; 36(6):414–32.
114. Brackenridge AL, Jackson N, Jefferson W, Stolinski M, Shojaee-Moradie F, Hovorka R, et al.
Effects of rosiglitazone and pioglitazone on lipoprotein metabolism in patients with Type 2
diabetes and normal lipids. Diabetic Med: J Brit Diabetic Assoc. 2009; 26(5):532–9.
115. Sarafidis PA, Lasaridis AN, Nilsson PM, Mouslech TF, Hitoglou-Makedou AD, Stafylas PC, et
al. The effect of rosiglitazone on novel atherosclerotic risk factors in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus and hypertension. An open-label observational study. Meta: Clin Exp. 2005; 54(9):
1236–42.
116. Vessby B, Kostner G, Lithell H, Thomis J. Diverging effects of cholestyramine on apolipoprotein
B and lipoprotein Lp(a). A dose-response study of the effects of cholestyramine in
hypercholesterolaemia. Atherosclerosis. 1982; 44(1):61–71. [PubMed: 6214264]
117. van Wijk J, Coll B, Cabezas MC, Koning E, Camps J, Mackness B, et al. Rosiglitazone
modulates fasting and post-prandial paraoxonase 1 activity in type 2 diabetic patients. Clin Exper
Pharmacol Physiol. 2006; 33(12):1134–7. [PubMed: 17184491]
118. Gupta N, Singh S, Maturu VN, Sharma YP, Gill KD. Paraoxonase 1 (PON1), polymorphisms,
haplotypes and activity in predicting CAD, risk in North-West Indian Punjabis. PLoS One. 2011;
6(5):e17805. [PubMed: 21629682]
119. Yoshida T, Kato K, Yokoi K, Oguri M, Watanabe S, Metoki N, et al. Association of genetic
variants with myocardial infarction in Japanese individuals with different lipid profiles. Int J Mol
Med. 2010; 25(4):607–16. [PubMed: 20198310]
120. Phillips GB. Relationship between serum sex hormones and glucose, insulin and lipid
abnormalities in men with myocardial infarction. Proceed Natl Acad Sci. 1977; 74(4):1729–33.
121. Kuller L, Arnold A, Tracy R, Otvos J, Burke G, Psaty B, et al. Nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy of lipoproteins and risk of coronary heart disease in the cardiovascular health study.
Arterioscler Throm Vas Biol. 2002; 22(7):1175–80.
122. Friis-Moller N, Sabin CA, Weber R, d’Arminio Monforte A, El-Sadr WM, Reiss P, et al.
Combination antiretroviral therapy and the risk of myocardial infarction. New England J Med.
2003; 349(21):1993–2003. [PubMed: 14627784]
123. Lekhal S, Børvik T, Brodin E, Nordøy A, Hansen J-B. Tissue factor-induced thrombin generation
in the fasting and postprandial state among elderly survivors of myocardial infarction. Thromb
Res. 2010; 126(4):353–9. [PubMed: 19880163]
124. De Caterina R, Talmud PJ, Merlini PA, Foco L, Pastorino R, Altshuler D, et al. Strong
association of the APOA5-1131T>C gene variant and early-onset acute myocardial infarction.
Atherosclerosis. 2011; 214(2):397–403. [PubMed: 21130994]
125. Chao L, Marcus-Samuels B, Mason MM, Moitra J, Vinson C, Arioglu E, et al. Adipose tissue is
required for the antidiabetic, but not for the hypolipidemic, effect of thiazolidinediones. J Clin
Invest. 2000; 106(10):1221–8. [PubMed: 11086023]
126. Nadeau KJ, Ehlers LB, Aguirre LE, Reusch JEB, Draznin B. Discordance between intramuscular
triglyceride and insulin sensitivity in skeletal muscle of Zucker diabetic rats after treatment with
fenofibrate and rosiglitazone. Diabetes Obe Metab. 2007; 9(5):714–23.
127. Suzuki S, Suzuki M, Sembon S, Fuchimoto D, Onishi A. Characterization of actions of octanoate
on porcine preadipocytes and adipocytes differentiated in vitro. Biochem Biophys Res
Communications. 2013; 432(1):92–8.
128. Im MJ, Hoopes JE. Increases in dihydronicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) content and
alpha-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase activity in epidermal wound healing. Proceedings of the
society for experimental biology and medicine. Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine
(New York, NY). 1983; 173(1):17–20.
129. Johnson BA, Wilson EM, Li Y, Moller DE, Smith RG, Zhou G. Ligand-induced stabilization of
PPARγ monitored by NMR spectroscopy: implications for nuclear receptor activation. J Mol
Biol. 2000; 298(2):187–94. [PubMed: 10764590]
130. Risérus U, Tan GD, Fielding BA, Neville MJ, Currie J, Savage DB, et al. Rosiglitazone increases
indexes of stearoyl-CoA desaturase activity in humans link to insulin sensitization and the role of

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 28

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

dominant-negative mutation in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ. Diabetes. 2005;
54(5):1379–84. [PubMed: 15855323]
131. Otake K, Azukizawa S, Fukui M, Shibabayashi M, Kamemoto H, Miike T, et al. 4tetrahydroisoquinoline-3-carboxylic acids: peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α/γ dual
agonists with protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B inhibitory activity. Chem Pharmaceut Bull. 2010;
59(10):1233–42.
132. Egerod FL, Svendsen JE, Hinley J, Southgate J, Bartels A, Brünner N, et al. PPARα and PPARγ
coactivation rapidly induces Egr-1 in the nuclei of the dorsal and ventral urinary bladder and
kidney pelvis urothelium of rats. Toxicol Pathol. 2009; 37(7):947–58. [PubMed: 20008548]
133. Fliegner D, Westermann D, Riad A, Schubert C, Becher E, Fielitz J, et al. Up-regulation of
PPARγ in myocardial infarction. Europ J Heart Fail. 2008; 10(1):30–8.
134. Lee C-H, Olson P, Evans RM. Minireview: lipid metabolism, metabolic diseases, and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors. Endocrinology. 2003; 144(6):2201–7. [PubMed: 12746275]
135. Gao D-F, Niu X-L, Hao G-H, Peng N, Wei J, Ning N, et al. Rosiglitazone inhibits angiotensin IIinduced CTGF expression in vascular smooth muscle cells – role of PPAR-γ in vascular fibrosis.
Biochem Pharmacol. 2007; 73(2):185–97. [PubMed: 17074304]
136. Tzameli I, Fang H, Ollero M, Shi H, Hamm JK, Kievit P, et al. Regulated production of a
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ ligand during an early phase of adipocyte
differentiation in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279(34):36093–102. [PubMed:
15190061]
137. Tsukahara T, Tsukahara R, Yasuda S, Makarova N, Valentine WJ, Allison P, et al. Different
residues mediate recognition of 1-O-oleyllysophosphatidic acid and rosiglitazone in the ligand
binding domain of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor. J Biol Chem. 2005; 281(6):3398–
407. [PubMed: 16321982]
138. Kim KY, Cheon HG. Antiangiogenic effect of rosiglitazone is mediated via peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-activated Maxi-K channel opening in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. J Biol Chem. 2006; 281(19):13503–12. [PubMed: 16527820]
139. Muhlhausler BS, Duffield JA, McMillen IC. Increased maternal nutrition increases leptin
expression in perirenal and subcutaneous adipose tissue in the postnatal lamb. Endocrinology.
2007; 148(12):6157–63. [PubMed: 17884936]
140. Ding J, Nagai K, Woo J-T. Insulin-dependent adipogenesis in stromal ST2 cells derived from
murine bone marrow. Biosci Biotech Biochem. 2003; 67(2):314–21.
141. Jung HS, Youn B-S, Cho YM, Yu K-Y, Park HJ, Shin CS, et al. The effects of rosiglitazone and
metformin on the plasma concentrations of resistin in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Metab: Clin Exper. 2005; 54(3):314–20. [PubMed: 15736108]
142. Patel L, Buckels AC, Kinghorn IJ, Murdock PR, Holbrook JD, Plumpton C, et al. Resistin is
expressed in human macrophages and directly regulated by PPAR gamma activators. Biochem
Biophys Res Communications. 2003; 300(2):472–6.
143. Boyle PJ, King AB, Olansky L, Marchetti A, Lau H, Magar R, et al. Effects of pioglitazone and
rosiglitazone on blood lipid levels and glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus:
a retrospective review of randomly selected medical records. Clin Ther. 2002; 24(3):378–96.
[PubMed: 11952022]
144. Chen B, Wild D, Guha R. PubChem as a source of polypharmacology. J Chem Info Model. 2009;
49(9):2044–55.
145. Pauwels E, Stoven V, Yamanishi Y. Predicting drug side-effect profiles: a chemical fragmentbased approach. BMC Bioinfo. 2011; 12(1):169.
146. Knox C, Law V, Jewison T, Liu P, Ly S, Frolkis A, et al. DrugBank 3. 0: a comprehensive
resource for ‘omics’ research on drugs. Nucl Acids Res. 2011; 39(Suppl 1):D1035–41. [PubMed:
21059682]
147. Kanehisa M, Goto S. KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. Nucl Acids Res. 2000;
28(1):27–30. [PubMed: 10592173]
148. Huang L-C, Wu X, Chen JY. Predicting adverse side effects of drugs. BMC Genom. 2011;
12(Suppl 5):S11.

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 29

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

149. Tatonetti NP, Patrick PY, Daneshjou R, Altman RB. Data-driven prediction of drug effects and
interactions. Sci Transl Med. 2012; 4(125):125ra31.
150. Kuhn M, Al Banchaabouchi M, Campillos M, Jensen LJ, Gross C, Gavin A-C, et al. Systematic
identification of proteins that elicit drug side effects. Mol Syst Biol. 2013; 9(1)
151. Kilicoglu, H.; Fiszman, M.; Rodriguez, A.; Shin, D.; Ripple, A.; Rindflesch, TC. Semantic
MEDLINE: a web application for managing the results of PubMed Searches. Proceedings of the
third international symposium for semantic mining in biomedicine; 2008. p. 69-76.
152. Ahlers CB, Fiszman M, Demner-Fushman D, Lang F-M, Rindflesch TC. Extracting semantic
predications from Medline citations for pharmacogenomics. Pac symp biocomput. 2006; 12:209–
20.
153. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2007 – FDA Adds Boxed Warning for Heart-related Risks to
Anti-Diabetes Drug Avandia. 2007 Nov 14. <http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/
PressAnnouncements/2007/ucm109026.htm>
154. Mahaffey KW, Hafley G, Dickerson S, Burns S, Tourt-Uhlig S, White J, et al. Results of a
reevaluation of cardiovascular outcomes in the RECORD trial. Amer Heart J. 2013; 166(2):240–
9. [PubMed: 23895806]
155. Lopes RD, Dickerson S, Hafley G, Burns S, Tourt-Uhlig S, White J, et al. Methodology of a
reevaluation of cardiovascular outcomes in the RECORD, trial: study design and conduct. Amer
Heart J. 2013; 166(2):208–216.e28. [PubMed: 23895802]
156. Thompson, D. FDA to lift restrictions on diabetes drug Avandia. 2013. <http://
health.usnews.com/health-news/news/articles/2013/11/25/fda-to-lift-restrictions-on-diabetesdrug-avandia>
157. Herskovic, JR.; Bernstam, EV. Using incomplete citation data for MEDLINE, results ranking.
AMIA, annual symposium proceedings; 2005. p. 316-20.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 30

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 1.

The pseudo code for RRI model training process.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 31

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 2.

Schematic representation of RRI training and inference process.

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 32

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 3.

The pseudo code for PSI model training process.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 33

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 4.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Schematic representation of PSI training and inference process. triglycerides: TG;
myocardial infarction: MI; INTERACTS_WITH: IW; COEXISTS_WITH: CoeW;
ASSOCIATED_WITH: AW; COMPARED_WITH: ComW.

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 34

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 5.

Experimental design in the detection of SIDER2 known ADRs using LBD distributional
semantic models.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 35

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 6.

ROC plot of true positive rate and false positive rate for all groups.

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 36

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 7.

Performance of AUC for all drugs by PSI-double + triple group.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 37

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 8.

Rediscovery plot for experiment groups.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 38

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 9.

The predications retrieved by reasoning pathway for rosiglitazone causing myocardial
infarction with specifying semantic groups for concepts.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 39

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 10.

Middle terms that were retrieved by PSI discovery patterns involving LDL-C.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 40

Table 1

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Different groups by extending MEDI in experiment 2.
MEDI intervention

Extension procedure

Experiment group

No MEDI

None

No-MEDI group

MEDI-HPS indications for SIDER2
drugs

All synonym (SY), child (CHD), and sibling (SIB),
as well as their offspring

MEDI-HPS-offspring group

Immediate synonym (SY), child (CHD), and sibling
(SIB) relationships

MEDI-HPS-immediate offspring group

None

MEDI-complete group

All synonym (SY), child (CHD), and sibling (SIB),
as well as their offspring

MEDI-complete-offspring group

Immediate synonym (SY), child (CHD), and sibling
(SIB) relationships

MEDI-complete-immediate offspring group

MEDI-complete indications for SIDER2
drugs

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 41

Table 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The most frequent predicate paths in inferred discovery patterns.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Double/triple-predicate

Example

INTERACTS_WITH
CAUSES-INV

Dipyridamole INTERACTS_WITH nitric oxide
Bradycardia CAUSES-INV nitric oxide

ASSOCIATED_WITH
COEXISTS_WITH

Rosiglitazone COEXISTS_WITH apolipoprotein a-ii
Apolipoprotein a-ii ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial infarction

COMPARED_WITH
CAUSES-INV

Bisoprolol COMPARED_WITH metoprolol
Hypotension CAUSES-INV metoprolol

ASSOCIATED_WITH
INTERACTS_WITH

Rosiglitazone INTERACTS_WITH triglycerides
Triglycerides ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial infarction

ISA
CAUSES-INV

Naproxen ISA calcineurin inhibitor
Toxic nephropathy CAUSES-INV calcineurin inhibitor

INTERACTS_WITH
INTERACTS_WITH
ASSOCIATED_WITH

Rosiglitazone INTERACTS_WITH lyrm1
Lyrm1 INTERACTS_WITH fatty acids, nonesterified
Fatty acides, nonesterified ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial infarction

INTERACTS_WITH
ASSOCIATED_WITH
COEXISTS_WITH

Rosiglitazone INTERACTS_WITH glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
Glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase COEXISTS_WITH succinate dehydrogenase
Succinate dehydrogenase ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial infarction

COMPARED_WITH
INTERACTS_WITH
ASSOCIATED_WITH

Rosiglitazone COMPARED_WITH glycerophosphates
Glycerophosphates INTERACTS_WITH low-density lipoproteins
Low-density lipoproteins ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial infarction

COMPARED_WITH
COEXISTS_WITH
ASSOCIATED_WITH

Rosiglitazone COMPARED_WITH gw 501516
Gw 501516 OEXISTS_WITH high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
High-density lipoprotein cholesterol ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial infarction

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
0.0520
0.0591
0.0848

PSI-double + triple

0.0365

RRI-from-predication

PSI-double

0.0300

Baseline

RRI-from-document

MAP

Group

0.1410

0.0942

0.0784

0.0469

0.0284

Pk=50 for all drugs (global precision)

808

1233

1333

1629

1708

Median

1108.47

1379.65

1454.30

1651.08

1711.44

Mean

Median rank (n = 3, 436)

0.6841

0.5973

0.5508

0.5140

0.5021

AUC

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Results of precision and rank-based measures for different groups.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Table 3
Shang et al.
Page 42

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
0.0849*
0.0798
0.0866*
0.0839
0.0673
0.0889*

MEDI-HPS-offspring

MEDI-HPS-immediate offspring

MEDI-complete

MEDI-complete-offspring

MEDI-complete-immediate offspring

0.0848

No-MEDI

MEDI-HPS

MAP

Group

0.1467*

0.0917

0.1401

0.1444*

0.1283

0.1417*

0.1410

Pk=50 for all drugs

773*

681*

809

795*

765

807*

808

Median

1068.72*

953.76*

1108.06*

1094.41*

1050.75*

1107.60

1108.47

Mean

Median rank (n = 3, 436)

0.6821

0.6737

0.6831

0.6850*

0.6813

0.6839

0.6841

AUC

PSI-double + triple model performance across all tests with different MEDI lists. Best results are in boldface. Performance exceeding the baseline (results
obtained by the best PSI model without MEDI) is marked with an asterisk (*).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Table 4
Shang et al.
Page 43

J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 44

Table 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Reasoning pathways used to retrieve evidence from the literature for the pair rosiglitazone – myocardial
infarction.
Predicate path
COMPARED_WITH : COEXISTS_WITH : ASSOCIATED_WITH
COMPARED_WITH : INTERACTS_WITH : ASSOCIATED_WITH
INTERACTS_WITH : COEXISTS_WITH : ASSOCIATED_WITH
INTERACTS_WITH : INTERACTS_WITH : ASSOCIATED_WITH
COEXISTS_WITH : ASSOCIATED_WITH
INTERACTS_WITH : ASSOCIATED_WITH
COMPARED_WITH : ASSOCIATED_WITH : COEXISTS_WITH
INTERACTS_WITH : ASSOCIATED_WITH : COEXISTS_WITH

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

Shang et al.

Page 45

Table 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Some example predications for possible mechanism of rosiglitazone causing myocardial infarction.
Middle term “LDL cholesterol lipoprotein”; 123 unique predication pathways;
•

rosiglitazone INTERACTS_WITH apolipoproteins_b [114,115] INTERACTS_WITH ldl_cholesterol_lipoproteins [116]
ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial_infarction [110]

•

rosiglitazone INTERACTS_WITH paraoxonase_1 [117] INTERACTS_WITH ldl_cholesterol_lipoproteins [118]
ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial_infarction [119]

Middle term “triglyceride”; 1515 unique predication pathways;
•

rosiglitazone COEXISTS_WITH triglycerides [110] ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial_infarction [120–124]

•

rosiglitazone INTERACTS_WITH triglycerides [125,126] ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial_infarction

•

rosiglitazone INTERACTS_WITH glycerol-3-phosphate_dehydrogenase [127] COEXISTS_WITH triglycerides [128]
ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial_infarction

Middle term “ppar_gamma”; 992 unique predication pathways; for example:

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

•

rosiglitazone COEXISTS_WITH ppar_gamma [129–132] ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial_infarction [133]

•

rosiglitazone INTERACTS_WITH ppar_gamma [134–138] ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial_infarction

•

rosiglitazone INTERACTS_WITH glycerol-3-phosphate_dehydrogenase [127] COEXISTS_WITH ppar_gamma [139]
ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial_infarction

•

rosiglitazone INTERACTS_WITH glycerol-3-phosphate_dehydrogenase INTERACTS_WITH ppar_gamma [140]
ASSOCIATED_WITH myocardial_infarction

•

rosiglitazone INTERACTS_WITH resistin [141] INTERACTS_WITH ppar_gamma [142] ASSOCIATED_WITH
myocardial_infarction

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
J Biomed Inform. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 01.

