TSINGHUA SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
ISSNll1007-0214 07/11 pp195–206
DOI: 1 0 . 2 6 5 9 9 / T S T . 2 0 1 8 . 9 0 1 0 0 7 4
Volume 24, Number 2, April 2019

Parallel ADR Detection Based on Spark and BCPNN
Li Sun, Shan Sun, Tianlei Wang, Jiyun Li , and Jingsheng Lin
Abstract: Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) is one of the major challenges to the evaluation of drug safety in the
medical field. The Bayesian Confidence Propagation Neural Network (BCPNN) algorithm is the main algorithm used
by the World Health Organization to monitor ADRs. Currently, ADR reports are collected through the spontaneous
reporting system. However, with the continuous increase in ADR reports and possible use scenarios, the efficiency
of the stand-alone ADR detection algorithm will encounter considerable challenges. Meanwhile, the BCPNN
algorithm requires a certain number of disk I/O, which leads to considerable time consumption. In this study,
we propose a Spark-based parallel BCPNN algorithm, which speeds up data processing and reduces the number
of disk I/O in BCPNN, and two optimization strategies. Then, the ADR data collected from the FDA Adverse Event
Reporting System are used to verify the performance of the proposed algorithm and its optimization strategies.
Experiments show that the parallel BCPNN can significantly accelerate data processing and the optimized algorithm
has a high acceleration rate and can effectively prevent memory overflow. Finally, we apply the proposed algorithm
to a dataset provided by a real medical consortium. Experiments further prove the performance and practical value
of the proposed algorithm.
Key words: Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR); Bayesian Confidence Propagation Neural Network (BCPNN); parallel;
Spark

1

Introduction

Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) is one of the major
challenges to the evaluation of drug safety in the
medical field[1] . ADRs have considerably increased the
economic burden and have become a threat to human
life and health, even leading to serious public health
events and mortality. Therefore, how to effectively
 Li Sun, Shan Sun, Tianlei Wang, and Jiyun Li are with
School of Computer Science and Technology, Donghua
University, Shanghai 201620, China. E-mail: sli@dhu.edu.cn;
sunshan 1128@126.com; 576138877@qq.com; jyli@dhu.
edu.cn.
 Jingsheng Lin is with the Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200020, China. Email: jasonlin@rjh.com.cn.
 To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Manuscript received: 2017-08-16; accepted: 2018-01-10

identify ADRs has become the problem that both the
academic and health management departments need to
pay close attention to.
At present, ADR data are mainly collected through
the spontaneous reporting system around the world.
The frequency and Bayesian methods are commonly
used to detect ADR signals[2] . The frequency method is
a classic signal detection method, which is based on the
two-by-two contingency table and applies the method
of ratio imbalance.
A disadvantage of the frequency method is that the
four factors in the two-by-two contingency table cannot
be zero, which means that each factor in the table must
have corresponding reports. If the amount of data is
small, then it is prone to false positive signals.
The most commonly used Bayesian method is
the Bayesian Confidence Propagation Neural Network
(BCPNN) algorithm[3] . The BCPNN algorithm applies

196

both the principle of ratio imbalance and the Bayesian
approach, which makes the model a feedforward
neural network. With the increase and update of
database information, the model can execute regular
autonomous learning and deduction and reevaluate the
cumulative ADR report. This feature makes the model
capable of detecting ADR signals in the early stage[4] .
Moreover, the model can calculate relevant results
despite missing data. Thus, the BCPNN algorithm
has become one of the main algorithms used by the
World Health Organization (WHO) to monitor daily
ADRs. The traditional BCPNN algorithm exhibits a
good performance in processing a certain amount
of data. However, with the increase in spontaneous
reporting data, the efficiency of data processing using
the stand-alone algorithm will encounter considerable
challenges. The BCPNN algorithm requires a certain
number of disk I/O in the process, which will consume
a considerable amount of computation time.
Spark is an open-source in-memory analytics cluster
computing engine that supports operations in parallel
steps[5] . Spark achieves distributed computation based
on the idea of MapReduce and is a memorybased calculation method. Thus, Spark can save a
considerable number of disk I/O and amount of storage
time in the process of executing the program.
Thus, in this study, a parallel BCPNN algorithm
based on Spark is proposed to speed up data processing,
reduce the number of disk I/O, and maintain a good
stability with the increase in the dataset. Then, an
optimized parallel algorithm is proposed to further
speed up data processing and prevent memory overflow
because of the data tilt caused by the uneven data.
Then, experiments are conducted using the ADR data
provided by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS). Results
show that the parallel BCPNN algorithm can efficiently
reduce the running time. Compared with the parallel
BCPNN algorithm, the optimized parallel method has a
better acceleration ratio and can more effectively reduce
the risk of memory overflow. Thus, the optimized
parallel method can better process massive data in ADR
signal detection than the parallel BCPNN algorithm.
Finally, we apply the algorithms to a real project to
further prove the performance of the method proposed
in this study.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly
introduces the related concepts, including the BCPNN
algorithm and Spark distributed computing framework.

Tsinghua Science and Technology, April 2019, 24(2): 195–206

Section 3 introduces the Spark-based parallel BCPNN
algorithm and two optimization strategies in detail. In
Section 4, experiments are conducted to verify the
performance of the method proposed in Section 3. In
Section 5, the algorithm and its optimization strategies
are applied to a real project. The results further prove
the performance and practical value of the theory
proposed in this study.

2
2.1

Related Work
BCPNN algorithm

The BCPNN algorithm was proposed in 1998 by
Bate et al.[6] working on the Uppsala International
Monitoring Center, a unit of the WHO. The BCPNN
is a feedforward neural network that uses the principles
of Bayes’ law to learn knowledge and evaluate an action
or event.
For the work presented in this study, we use the
BCPNN as a one-layer feedforward neural network.
Drugs and ADR events are used as the input and
output of the neural network, respectively. In our
daily applications, drugs and ADR events are known;
thus, we can construct the weights (generally called
the Information Component, IC) between the input and
output nodes[7] . These weights provide a measure of
dependency between specific input and output nodes.
The IC, which is used as the weight of the network,
is derived using a calculation based on information
theory[8] . The IC is defined, as follows:
p.x; y/
IC D log2
.1/
p.x/p.y/
where p.x/ represents the probability of the occurrence
of a particular drug x in an event report, p.y/ represents
the probability of the occurrence of a particular adverse
event y in an event report, and p.x; y/ represents
the probability of the occurrence of the drug–ADR
combination in an event report.
Then, the IC expectations can be expressed in
Formula (2) as follows:
E.p.x; y//
.2/
E(IC) D log2
E.p.x//E.p.y//
Beta distribution is selected for the probability of
the individual variables, and Dirichlet distribution
is selected for the joint probability because they
are conjugate priors. The formula for E(IC) can be
expressed as follows:
.a C 11 /.N C ˛/.N C ˇ/
E(IC) D log2
.N C /.a C b C ˛1 /.a C c C ˇ1 /
.3/
Moreover, the variance of IC is defined as follows:

Li Sun et al.: Parallel ADR Detection Based on Spark and BCPNN



2

197

.N a C
11 /
.4/
.N a b C ˛ ˛1 /
.N a c C ˇ ˇ1 /
.a C 11 /.1 C N C / C
C
.a C b C ˛1 /.1 C N C ˛/
.a C c C ˇ1 /.1 C N C ˇ/
where ˛; ˛1 ; ˇ; and ˇ1 are the parameters of the beta
obtained, the BCPNN algorithm can reevaluate the
distribution, and 11 are parameters of the Dirichlet
cumulative ADR report based on the prior probability.
distribution, and N represents the number of all of
Thus, with the increase in the data, the accuracy of the
the reports. The meaning of a; b; c; and d and the
results will be improved, making it suitable for ADR
relationships between a; b; c; d; and N are shown in
detection in big data environments[10] .
Table 1.
2.2 Spark introduction
For the parameters ˛; ˛1 ; ˇ; ˇ1 ; ; and 11 , when
Spark is a memory-based computing framework,
no association exists between the drug and the ADR
which has better computing and fault tolerance
event, the default parameters can be defined as follows:
capabilities and supports batch, iterative, and
˛1 D 1; ˛ D 2; ˇ1 D 1; ˇ D 2; and 11 D 1:
flow calculations[11] . Spark is a general distributed
Notably, if we assume that no association exists
computing framework, which is based on the Hadoop
between the drug and the ADR event, then the
MapReduce algorithm[12] . The core idea of the Hadoop
parameter can be defined as presented previously.
MapReduce algorithm is to split a large task to small
However, if we conduct signal detection on a certain
ones and execute them in parallel. The method of
amount of ADR data and obtain specific statistical
splitting a large task into small ones can efficiently
results, then, when a new batch of data is obtained,
avoid the problem that large data cannot be loaded
the parameter should be updated using the prior
into memory. However, intermediate results need
probabilities derived from the previous results, which
to be stored in the Hadoop Distributed File System
reflect the principle of Bayesian statistics in the BCPNN
(HDFS) on the Hadoop platform, which will consume
[9]
algorithm .
a considerable amount of time because of the large
The parameter is defined as follows:
number of disk I/O. Thus, the Hadoop platform is
..N C ˛/.N C ˇ//
D 11
.5/
unsuitable for iterative computation and is usually only
..b C ˛1 /.c C ˇ1 //
suitable for one iteration or large data query. Hence,
Then, we can determine the weight of the neural
with the demand to solve the problem of data mining
network information using Formulas (3) and (4).
algorithm efficiency, Spark came into being[13] .
In general, the standard BCPNN is used to detect
Spark also has the advantages of Hadoop
suspicious ADR in the following situations: If the
MapReduce.
However, in contrast to that of
lower 95% confidence limit is greater than zero, that
MapReduce, the intermediate and output results
is, E.IC/ 2SD > 0 (where
p SD represents the standard
of Spark jobs can be stored in memory. When the
deviation of IC, SD D .V .IC//, then it indicates an
intermediate result needs to be used again, it can
ADR signal. If
be immediately taken from memory, which reduces
0 < E.IC/ 2SD 6 1:5;
the time consumption of disk I/O and improves
then it indicates a weak signal; if
the efficiency of data computing. Spark provides a
1:5 < E.IC/ 2SD 6 3:0;
new method of data computing with fault tolerance,
then it indicates a medium-intensity signal; if
which effectively reduces the disk and network I/O
E.IC/ 2SD > 3:0;
overhead[14] .
then it indicates a strong signal. On the basis of the
Spark provides a memory-based abstract object
principle of Bayesian statistics, when new data are
Resilient Distributed Dataset (RDD). RDD is the central
Table 1 Two-by-two contingency table.
module and class in the Spark platform, represents
the abstraction of the dataset, and is a fault-tolerant
Objective
Other
Item
Summation
collection of elements that can be operated in parallel.
ADR event ADR event
Spark provides and uses a number of RDD operators,
Objective drug
a
b
intAB D a C b
Other drug
c
d
cCd
such as map, reduce, union, filter, reduceByKey,
N D a C bC
partitionBy, join, and count, to complete the RDD
Summation intAC D a C c
bCd
cCd
conversion. RDD can be cached in the RAM, which
V .IC/ D

1
ln 2

Tsinghua Science and Technology, April 2019, 24(2): 195–206

198

ensures rapid data access and reduces the number of
disk operations.
Another important concept in Spark is the Directed
Acyclic Graph (DAG). In Spark, the calculations occur
when the action operation of RDD is triggered. For
all of the transformation operations before the action
operation, Spark only records the trajectory of the
transformation operation of RDD without triggering a
real calculation. The Spark kernel draws a DAG of
the calculated path. When the action is triggered,
the calculation starts from the starting point of the
DAG[15, 16] .
The Spark calculation model is shown in Fig. 1.
In Fig. 1, each of the large solid-line rectangles
represents an RDD, and the small rectangles inside
them are the data partitions in the RDDs.

3

Our Approach

As discussed in Section 1, with the increase and update
of the ADR reports, the traditional BCPNN algorithm
can execute regular autonomous learning and deduction
and reevaluate the cumulative ADR report[17] . Thus,
with the increase in the data, the accuracy of the results
will be improved. The traditional BCPNN algorithm is
suitable for ADR detection in big data environments.
However, with the increase in the reports collected
through the spontaneous reporting system, the use
of the BCPNN method alone will considerably limit
the data processing speed. Moreover, the traditional
BCPNN algorithm requires a certain number of disk
I/O, which not only consumes time but also takes up
the system CPU. Thus, a method that can accelerate
data processing, ensure the stability of the system, and
reduce the number of disk I/O needs to be proposed.

Fig. 1

Spark calculation model.

In this study, a Spark-based parallel BCPNN algorithm
is proposed to solve the problems that ADR signal
detection encounters in big data environments. Two
optimization strategies are also proposed.
In this section, we first describe the algorithm
flow and the implementation method of the Sparkbased parallel BCPNN algorithm. Then, aiming at
the problems that the parallel BCPNN algorithm
encounters when applied to ADR detection, we
propose two optimization strategies. The principles and
implementation algorithms of these two optimization
strategies are described in detail.
3.1

Parallel BCPNN algorithm based on Spark

We can divide the traditional stand-alone BCPNN
algorithm into four stages. In the first stage, when
new data are inputted into the database, the parameters
˛; ˛1 ; ˇ; ˇ1 ; and 11 are set as default values if it is
the first time to detect the ADR signal on the dataset
or are updated according to the prior probability if
ADR signal detection is conducted on a certain amount
of ADR data and statistical results are obtained. In
the second stage, the values of a; b; c; and N in the
two-by-two contingency table are updated and the
value of the last parameter
is calculated using
Formula (5) and the parameters ˛; ˛1 ; ˇ; ˇ1 ; and 11
and a; b; c; and N are updated using the previously
presented steps. In the third stage, IC (in this study, IC
refers to E(IC)) and SD are calculated
p using Formulas
(2) and (3) and the formula SD D .V .IC//. In the
fourth stage, the suspected drug–ADR combination is
detected according to the determination criteria.
The BCPNN algorithm based on Spark can also be
calculated according to the four stages of the traditional
BCPNN algorithm. The concrete implementation
flowchart of the Spark-based parallel BCPNN algorithm
is shown in Fig. 2, and the four stages of the Sparkbased parallel algorithm will be described in detail.
In the first stage of the Spark-based parallel
algorithm, when new data are inputted into the dataset,
all of the data in the dataset will be stored in the
HDFS, an RDD will be created for the dataset, and
the RDD will be cached in the memory[18] . If it
is the first time to detect the ADR signal on the
dataset, then the parameters ˛; ˛1 ; ˇ; ˇ1 ; and 11 need
not be calculated. Thus, only the default values,
that is, ˛1 D 1; ˛ D 2; ˇ1 D 1; ˇ D 2; and 11 D 1
are considered. However, if specific statistical results
are obtained from a certain amount of ADR data, then

Li Sun et al.: Parallel ADR Detection Based on Spark and BCPNN

Fig. 2

Spark-based BCPNN algorithm flowchart.

the parameters ˛; ˛1 ; ˇ; ˇ1 ; and 11 should be updated
according to the prior probability and the new data using
the map operation.
In the second stage, drug and ADR data in the
RDD should be recounted to determine the values of
a; b; and c in the two-by-two contingency table. The
method used to compute a; b; and c adopts the idea of
MapReduce.
We use the map operation to set key–value pairs,
where the field that needs to obtain the statistics is set
as the key and the value is set as 1. Then, we count
the key using the reduceByKey operation. The value
of N is obtained using the function count ./. In order
to facilitate the computation in the third stage, we use

Fig. 3

199

the join operation to convert the data of drug, ADR, a,
intAB, and intAC into a vector and the map operation to
convert the value of N into a vector. The transformation
operations of RDD in the second stage are shown in
Fig. 3.
Then, we convert the results of the first and second
stages into a vector string (Drug, ADR, a, intAB, intAC,
N , ˛; ˛1 ; ˇ; ˇ1 ; 11 ) using the join operation. We call
the RDD storing the vectors as RDD M. Then, we
calculate the value of the last parameter using the map
operation and Formula (5).
In the third stage, we use the map operation to
calculate the values of E(IC) and SD, and the join
operation to combine them into a vector. Then, we

RDD transformation in the second stag.

Tsinghua Science and Technology, April 2019, 24(2): 195–206

200

calculate the value of ic min using the map operation.
The RDD transformation process in the third stage is
shown in Fig. 4. RDD M in the figure is the result of
the second stage.
We need to store the data in the two-by-two
contingency table to facilitate the updating of the
parameters after new data are obtained. Thus, we use
the join operation to convert the useful data into one
vector string (Drug, ADR, a; b; c; N , ic min).
In the fourth stage, we use the map transformation,
if–else statements, and value of ic min to detect the
suspected drug–ADR signals; If
0 < ic min 6 1:5;
then it indicates a weak signal; if
1:5 < ic min 6 3:0;
then it indicates a medium intensity signal; if
ic min > 3:0;
then it indicates a strong signal[19] .
As the parallel algorithm runs on a distributed cluster,
the speed of the algorithm is considerably improved.
Moreover, the Spark-based parallel BCPNN algorithm
reduces the number of disk I/O, which speeds up data
processing further[20] .
3.2

Improved strategy: Pre-hash partition before
join

As discussed in the previous section, in the Spark-based
BCPNN parallel algorithm, the join operation is used
many times, which can lead to high communication
costs. By default, the join operation will calculate the
hash values for all keys in the two databases, transfer
the records that have the same hash value to one

Fig. 4

RDD transformation in the third stage.

machine over the network, and combine the records
that have the same hash value on that machine. The
join operation will lead to high communication costs
between partitions, which not only waste a considerable
amount of time but also increase the network burden.
The join operation in the third stage of the Sparkbased parallel BCPNN algorithm is taken as an
example. The communication among partitions is
shown in Fig. 5. When the operation RDDSD join
RDDIC is called, Spark initially computes the hash
value for each key–value pair in each partition and
subsequently sends the key–value pairs that have the
same hash value as the corresponding intermediate
partition. The partitions in RDDIC are processed in the
same manner. Finally, the key–value pairs are joined in
the intermediate partitions.
As shown in Fig. 5, every partition in RDDSD
and RDDIC needs to communicate with every
partition in the intermediate RDD, which requires high
communication costs, leading to considerable time
consumption and increase in the network burden.
We propose a method of reassigning the partition
data by hashing before the join operation to reduce
the communication cost caused by the join operation.
For the operation RDDSD join RDDIC in the Sparkbased parallel BCPNN algorithm, we use the operation
partitionBy./ to reassign the partition data in the
RDDSD and cache them in the memory before the join
operation. When the operation RDDSD join RDDIC
is called, Spark will only shuffle the data in RDDIC
and send each record in RDDIC to the machine that
stores the records of RDDSD that has the same hash
value. The communication among partitions in the two
RDDs is shown in Fig. 6. Notably, every partition in
RDDSD only needs to communicate with one partition.
In this manner, the communication between partitions

Fig. 5

Connection operation without using partitionBy().

Li Sun et al.: Parallel ADR Detection Based on Spark and BCPNN

Fig. 6

Connection operation using partitionBy().

is reduced. Thus, the running speed of the program
is significantly improved and the network burden is
reduced.
Algorithm 1 shows the method of pre-hash partition
before join operation. First, we obtain RDDIC and
RDDSD using the map operation. Then, we use the
partitionBy() transformation operation to deal with the
partition data. We send the Spark.HashPartitioner
object to the partitionBy operation to transform the
partitions in RDDSD to hash partitions. The parameter
n of the HashPartition refers to the number of partitions,
controls the parallel number when the join operation is
called, and is usually at least the same as the number
of clusters. Then, the RDD should be cached in the
memory. Finally, the join operation is called. This
method applies to all join operations in the parallel
BCPNN algorithm based on Spark.
3.3

Improved strategy:
parallelism

201

a few keys correspond to tens of thousands of data.
When data are shuffled, records that have the same
key in all nodes will be pulled to a task in a unique
node and dealt with. The task assigned only 10 data
may run over in 1 s, whereas the task assigned tens of
thousands of data may need one or two hours to run
over. To our knowledge, the running time is decided
by the task that has the longest running time. In fact,
Spark becomes slow because of the data tilt. With the
increase in the data, the degree of data tilt will increase,
which will considerably limit the running speed and
may even lead to memory overflow. Figure 7 shows the
data tilt situation. We propose an optimization strategy,
that is, improving the shuffling parallelism, to solve
the previously mentioned problems. By increasing the
shuffle task number, the keys assigned to one task can
be assigned to multiple tasks. Then, each task needs
to deal with less data than before. The optimized task
allocation is shown in Fig. 8.

Improving shuffling

From the drug information of the dataset provided by
the FAERS, we determined that, among the 21 593
kinds of drugs collected from January to June in 2016,
18 520 kinds of drugs have only less than 10 data,
whereas 1 kind of drug called HUMIRA has up to
33 048 data. Most keys correspond to 10 data, whereas
Algorithm 1 Pre-hash partition before join
Require: row RDDrow data RDD(line)
Ensure: resultRDD: join result RDD
1: RDDIC ! RDD.map(funIC())
2: RDDSD ! RDD.map(funSD())
3: RDDSD h! RDDSD.partitionBy(newHashPartition(n)).
cache()
4: RDDSD IC! (RDDSD h).join(RDDIC)
Ensure: resultRDD: join result RDD

Fig. 7 Task assignment without improving shuffling
parallelism.

Fig. 8 Task
parallelism.

assignment

with

improving

shuffling

Tsinghua Science and Technology, April 2019, 24(2): 195–206

202

Algorithm 2 shows the method used to improve
the shuffling parallelism to speed up data processing
and prevent memory overflow because of the data
tilt. After the RDD is transformed into the RDD(key,
value) format using the map operation, we use the
reduceByKey operation to implement the aggregation
function for the RDD(key, value) format. The parameter
func(value) of the reduceByKey operation refers to
the aggregation function, and the parameter numoftask
refers to the number of parallel tasks. Then, the RDD
can be cached in the memory.

with large amounts of data. We called the original and
extended datasets D1, D2, D3, and D4 to facilitate easy
description.
Figure 9 shows that, compared with the stand-alone
BCPNN algorithm, the Spark-based algorithm can save
a considerable amount of time. With the increase in
the dataset, the growth rate slows down, which indicates
that the Spark-based algorithm is suitable for dealing
with large amounts of data.

4

We conducted three groups of experiments on the
extended datasets D1, D2, D3, and D4 to verify
the performance of the optimization strategies. The
three groups of experiments are the Spark-based
BCPNN, the Spark-based optimized parallel BCPNN
algorithm that uses the strategy of pre-hash partition
before join, and the Spark-based optimized parallel
BCPNN algorithm that uses both strategies to compare
the performance before and after the optimization
strategies. Experiments were conducted on the cluster
with only one work node.
Figure 10 shows that both strategies can efficiently
reduce the time consumption. After applying the second
strategy, the growth rate obviously slows down with
the increase in the data. Thus, improving the shuffling
parallelism is a good solution to the problem of time
wasted because of the data tilt.
Then, we run the parallel BCPNN algorithm before
and after optimization in the cluster with node numbers
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 on the platform to compare the
acceleration ratio. We extend the original dataset to 10
times to make the experimental results more obvious.

4.1

Experimental Results and Analysis
Experimental environment and dataset

Dataset: The experimental data are the ADR data
that were collected by the FAERS from January to
December in 2016[21] . The FDA began to analyze data
from their own reporting system in 1993. Subsequently,
in 1998, they made the data available to researchers.
Hardware and software: The experimental
environment is a Spark cluster consisting of six
PCs. In addition, we installed CentOS6.5, Spark1.5.1,
Hadoop2.6.0, and jdk7 in the six PCs. The available
memory of each PC is 4 GB. The experimental
platform uses IntelliJ IDEA Community Edition 15.0.1
as a cluster development tool. For the programming
language, the program is written by Scala.
4.2

Parallel algorithm performance experiment

We conducted experiments to compare the stand-alone
algorithm and the Spark-based parallel algorithm. First,
we applied the Spark-based BCPNN on the cluster with
only one work node and the traditional BCPNN to
the original dataset to compare the time consumption.
The experiment shows that the parallel algorithm can
significantly reduce the data processing time. Then, we
extend the original dataset to 1, 2, 3, and 4 times and
conduct experiments on the extended datasets to verify
the performance of the parallel algorithm in dealing
Algorithm 2 Improving shuffling parallelism
Require: row RDD: raw data RDD (line)
1: transform RDD (line) to RDD(key,value) format
2: RDD ! rowRDD.map(line ) (key, value))
3: RDDSD ! RDD.map(funSD())
4: RDDintAB ! RDD.reduceByKey(func(value),numoftask)
.cache()
5: return (result RDD)
Ensure: resultRDD: statistical result RDD.

4.3

Fig. 9
alone.

Optimized parallel algorithm performance
experiment

Time comparison of BCPNN on Spark and stand-

Li Sun et al.: Parallel ADR Detection Based on Spark and BCPNN

203
Table 2

Memory (GB)
1
2
4

Fig. 10

Time comparison before and after optimization.

The acceleration ratio refers to the performance
improvement achieved by reducing the running time
by parallel computing and is an important measure of
parallel computing performance. The formula of the
acceleration ratio is Ts =Td , where Ts represents the time
spent on a single node and Td represents the time it
takes to calculate the parallel algorithm[22] . The higher
the acceleration ratio is, the shorter the relative time for
parallel computing and the higher the parallel efficiency
and performance.
Figure 11 shows that the acceleration rate of
the optimized algorithm is higher than that of
the unoptimized algorithm. Thus, the proposed
optimization strategies can effectively improve the data
efficiency and computational performance.
Then, we run the Spark-based parallel BCPNN and
Spark-based optimized parallel BCPNN algorithm with
the available memory of 1 GB, 2 GB, and 4 GB in the
original dataset to complete the performance of the
second strategy in preventing memory overflow.
Table 2 shows a comparison of whether memory

Memory overflow situation.

Before optimization
Overflow
Overflow
No overflow

After optimization
No overflow
No overflow
No overflow

overflows or not before and after improving the
shuffling parallelism. Table 2 also shows that the
algorithm that increases the shuffling parallelism is
less prone to memory overflow. Thus, the method
of improving the shuffling parallelism proposed in
this study can effectively prevent memory from
overflowing.
In this section, we conduct experiments to compare
the stand-alone BCPNN algorithm, the Spark-based
parallel algorithm, and the optimized parallel algorithm.
First, we apply the traditional BCPNN and the Sparkbased BCPNN on the cluster with only one work node
to the original dataset to compare the time consumption.
We extend the original dataset to 1, 2, 3, and 4 times
and conduct experiments on the extended datasets to
verify the performance of parallel algorithms in dealing
with large amounts of data. Then, we run the parallel
BCPNN algorithm before and after optimization in
the cluster with node numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and
6 on the platform to compare the acceleration ratio.
The experiments show that the Spark-based parallel
algorithm can significantly reduce the data processing
time and has a good performance in dealing with
large amounts of data. Then, we conduct three
groups of experiments to verify the performance of
the optimization strategies. The experiments show that
both optimization strategies can efficiently reduce the
time consumption. Finally, we conduct experiments
to verify whether the second strategy can efficiently
prevent memory overflow.

5

Application to a Real Project

We apply the parallel algorithm and the improved
parallel algorithm proposed in this study to a real
project to further verify the performance of the
proposed method in ADR monitoring.
5.1

Fig. 11

Speedup before and after optimization.

Experimental environment and experimental
data

Dataset: The dataset of the project is the real electronic
medical records information from May to November
in 2016 provided by a real medical consortium in
China. Every record in the dataset contains the drug

204

and symptom information described in the unstructured
text in Chinese.
Hardware and software: The experimental
environment is the same as that described in Section
4. For the programming language, the program is
written in Python in the data preprocessing phase and
the program is written in Scala in the ADR detection
phase.
5.2

Preprocessing of dataset

Before applying the parallel BCPNN algorithm,
we need to conduct data preprocessing. In normal
circumstances, the electronic medical records provided
by hospitals or medical consortia are described in
the original language, but the data required for the
algorithm are the drug and symptom words. In this
section, we describe a data preprocessing method for
the Chinese electronic medical records to extract the
symptom words from the electronic medical records
before conducting the algorithmic experiments to solve
the previously mentioned problem.
For extracting the symptom words of suspected ADR
from the original language, our idea is to identify
a standard symptom thesaurus or a standard ADR
symptom thesaurus and extract symptom words from
the original language by matching them with the words
in the symptom thesaurus.
The symptom thesaurus that we used includes all of
the symptom words in the ADR data collected by the
FAERS from January to December in 2016. However,
the ADR symptom words in the FAERS are written in
English, and the electronic medical records that we need
to extract the symptom words are written in Chinese.
Thus, we need to translate the symptom thesaurus from
English to Chinese. The tool that we used to translate
the symptom thesaurus into Chinese is the translation
API provided by Google. We only need to obtain
an API developer certificate from the Google Cloud
Platform Console and call the API in the program to
execute the translation job.
After translating the symptom thesaurus into
Chinese, we extract symptom words from the original
language by matching them with the words in the
symptom thesaurus. The method that we used to extract
symptom words from the original language is the
Aho–Corasick (AC) automata[23, 24] . The AC automata
was developed in the Bell Labs in 1975 and is one of
the well-known multimode matching algorithms. The
AC automata is based on the Trie dictionary tree and

Tsinghua Science and Technology, April 2019, 24(2): 195–206

KMP pattern matching algorithm and is a multimode
string matching algorithm. Its function is to derive a
substring from the input string that matches the pattern
string in the dictionary[24] .
The steps to extract symptom words using the AC
automata are as follows:
 First, we build a tree using the dictionary string
set. Each node in the tree represents a string that
consists of the characters from the root to this node in
order. Each time we insert a string, the original tree
will be expanded. If there is no node that points to the
character, then we need to create a new node in the tree.
After all of the strings are added to the tree, the tree is
completed.
 Then, we use the BFS method to calculate the
Fail pointer for each node. The Fail pointer refers to
the longest suffix of the current string that matches the
node. Thus, the AC automata is successfully created.
This effect has been widely investigated .
 After the AC automata is created, we can use it to
match the existing strings. For each string, we conduct
verbatim match. If the next node can match the next
character, then we continue. Otherwise, we go back
to the previous step until a node meets the matching
conditions. If a word in the dictionary appears in the
original string, then we mark that word and extract it.
By using the AC automata, we can extract the
symptom words from the electronic medical records
provided by hospitals or medical consortia.
5.3

Results of the ADR detection experiments

After data preprocessing, we obtain the dataset
consisting of the drugs and corresponding symptom
words. Then, we apply the stand-alone BCPNN
algorithm and the Spark-based unoptimized and
optimized parallel algorithms to the dataset. We use
only one working node in the cluster to compare with
the stand-alone BCPNN. The time consumption of each
algorithm is shown in Fig. 12.
Figure 12 shows that the Spark-based parallel
algorithm saves a considerable amount of time than
the stand-alone algorithm. Moreover, the optimized
parallel algorithm is less time consuming than the
unoptimized parallel algorithm.
The data show the time spent by the algorithms on
the dataset with only one work node in the cluster, and
it takes 28 min to complete the data processing using the
optimized parallel BCPNN algorithm. To speed up data
processing, we apply the optimized parallel BCPNN

Li Sun et al.: Parallel ADR Detection Based on Spark and BCPNN

205

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

Fig. 12

Time consumption of the algorithms.
[5]

algorithm to the dataset with six nodes in the cluster,
and it only takes 8 min.
Thus, the application to a real project further proves
the performance and practical value of the proposed
algorithm in ADR detection.

6

[6]

Conclusion

In this study, we propose a new algorithm for
ADR detection based on Spark and BCPNN, which
overcomes the problem of signal detection on large
amounts of ADR data. Then, we propose two
optimization strategies for the Spark-based parallel
BCPNN algorithm, namely, pre-hash partition before
join, which solves the problem of the slow running
speed because of the join operation, and improving
the shuffling parallelism to speed up data processing
and prevent memory overflow caused by the data tilt.
The experiments show that the method can effectively
increase the detection speed, improve the acceleration
ratio, and prevent memory overflow. Then, we apply
the algorithms to a real project. We introduce a data
preprocessing method for electronic medical records
and conduct experiments to apply the algorithms to the
preprocessed dataset. The experiments further prove
the performance and practical value of the proposed
algorithm.

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

Acknowledgment
This work was supported in part by the Science and
Technology Innovation Action Plan Project of Science
and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality
(No. 18511102703) and the Scientific Research Plan
Project of Science and Technology Commission of
Shanghai Municipality (No. 16JC1400803).

[13]

[14]
[15]

A. Bate, M. Lindquist, I. R. Edwards, and R. Orre, A data
mining approach for signal detection and analysis, Drug
Saf., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 393–397, 2002.
A. Bate, The use of a Bayesian confidence propagation
neural network in pharmacovigilance, PhD dissertation,
Umeå University, Sweden, 2003.
S. Karimi, C. Wang, A. Metke-Jimenez, R. Gaire, and C.
Paris, Text and data mining techniques in adverse drug
reaction detection, ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 47, no.
4, p. 56, 2015.
W. G. Chen and J. X. Deng, A study on signal detection and
automatic warning algorithm for adverse drug reaction, in
Proc. 2008 International Conference on Computer Science
and Software Engineering, 2008.
K. V. Swetha, S. Sathyadevan, and P. Bilna, Network
data analysis using spark, in Software Engineering in
Intelligent Systems, R. Silhavy, R. Senkerik, Z. Oplatkova,
Z. Prokopova, and P. Silhavy, eds. Springer, 2015, pp. 253–
259.
A. Bate, M. Lindquist, I. R. Edwards, S. Olsson, R.
Orre, A. Lansner, and R. M. De Freitas, A Bayesian
neural network method for adverse drug reaction signal
generation, Eur. J. Clin. Pharmacol., vol. 54, no. 4, pp.
315–321, 1998.
N. Farahini, A. Hemani, A. Lansner, F. Clermidy, and C.
Svensson, A scalable custom simulation machine for the
Bayesian Confidence Propagation Neural Network model
of the brain. in Proc. 2014 19th Asia and South Pacific
Design Automation Conf., Singapore, 2014, pp. 578–585.
B. Honigman, J. Lee, J. Rothschild, P. Light, R. M. Pulling,
T. Yu, and D. W. Bates, Using computerized data to
identify adverse drug events in outpatients, J. Am. Med.
Inform. Assoc., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 254–266, 2001.
L. Duan, M. Khoshneshin, W. N. Street, and M. Liu,
Adverse drug effect detection, IEEE Journal of Biomedical
& Health Informatics, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 305–311, 2013.
D. W. Bates, R. S. Evans, H. Murff, P. D. Stetson, L.
Pizziferri, and G. Hripcsak, Detecting adverse events using
information technology, Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 115–128, 2003.
Z. J. Han and Y. J. Zhang, Spark: A big data processing
platform based on memory computing, in Proc. 7 th Int.
Symposium on Parallel Architectures, Algorithms and
Programming, Nanjing, China, 2015, pp. 172–176.
A. Solovyev, M. Mikheev, L. M. Zhou, J. Dutta-Moscato,
C. Ziraldo, G. An, Y. Vodovotz, and Q. Mi, SPARK:
A framework for multi-scale agent-based biomedical
modeling, International Journal of Agent Technologies &
Systems, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 18–30, 2010.
P. Cao, Optimization and implementation of clustering
algorithm based on Spark platform, (in Chinese), master
degree dissertation, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing,
China, 2016.
A. Zhang, Insider of Spark Technology, (in Chinese).
Beijing, China: Mechanical Industry Press, 2015.
J. Fu, J. W. Sun, and K. Y. Wang, SPARK—A big data

Tsinghua Science and Technology, April 2019, 24(2): 195–206

206

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]

processing platform for machine learning, in Proc. 2016
International Conference on Industrial Informatics Computing Technology, Intelligent Technology, Industrial
Information Integration, Wuhan, China, 2017, pp. 48–51.
T. Brewer and G. A. Colditz, Postmarketing surveillance
and adverse drug reactions: Current perspectives and future
needs, JAMA, vol. 218, no. 9, pp. 824–829, 1999.
A. Lansner and Ö. Ekeberg, A one-layer feedback artificial
neural network with a Bayesian learning rule, International
Journal of Neural Systems, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 77–87, 1989.
H. Karau, A. Konwinski, P. Wendell, and M. Zaharia,
Learning Spark: Lightning-Fast Data Analysis,
(in Chinese). Beijing, China: People’s Posts and
Telecommunications Press, 2015.
W. Y. Li, Research on apache spark for big data processing,
(in Chinese), Modern Computer, no. 8, pp. 55–60, 2015.
S. L. Xie, Research and application of distributed ETL

Li Sun is an associate professor at School
of Computer Science and Technology,
Donghua University, Shanghai, China. She
received the MS degree in computer
science from Donghua University in
1986. Her main research interests include
database, data mining, and artificial
intelligence technology.
Shan Sun received the BEng degree
from Shanghai Ocean University of
Comuper Science and Technology, in
2015. She is currently a master student
in Donghua University, China. Her main
research interests include data mining, data
warehouse, etc.
Tianlei Wang is now a master student
in University of Southern California.
He received the bachelor degree from
Donghua University in 2018. He was
also a silver medalist of ACM-ICPC
Asian regional contest. His main research
interests include data mining, text analysis,
etc.

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

based on spark, (in Chinese), master degree dissertation,
Donghua University, Shanghai, China, 2017.
FDA adverse event reporting system (FAERS):
Latest quarterly data files, https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/
GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Surveillance/
AdverseDrugEffects/ucm082193.htm, 2017.
Z. F. Wu, T. Zhang, and Y. Xiao, Improvement and parallel
implementation of K-means clustering algorithm based on
the Spark platform, (in Chinese), China Internet, no. 1, pp.
44–50, 2016.
P. F. Wang and L. Li, Research on multi-pattern matching
algorithms based on Aho-Corasick algorithm, (in Chinese),
Application Research of Computers, vol. 28, no. 4, pp.
1251–1253&1259, 2011.
A. V. Aho and M. J. Corasick, Efficient string matching:
An aid to bibliographic search, Communications of the
ACM, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 333–340, 1975.

Jiyun Li received the MS and PhD
degrees from Donghua University in 1996
and 2003, respectively. Currently she
is a professor of computer science and
technology in Donghua University. Her
research interests include data engineering,
machine learning, etc.
Jingsheng Lin received the BEng degree
from East China University of Science and
Technology in 2009, and the Engineering
Master degree from Donghua University
in 2011. Now he is working at Ruijin
Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao
Tong University. His main research
interests include deep learning, artificial
intelligence, intelligent medical, etc.

